
<h2 class="nobreak">TRANSLATOR’S NOTE</h2>
</div>


<p>Since there is no actual equivalent of the position
of “Staatsanwalt” it is almost impossible to find
an English rendering that conveys its full meaning.
In part the duties assimilate those of the Public
Prosecutor, but in England we can hardly conceive
of an official of high judicial status personally
identifying himself with his cases to the extent
of disguising himself and playing the part of a
detective. Wenk’s position appears to combine
some of the offices which would here be delegated
to various individuals acting more or less independently
as subordinates to a higher and single
authority. He was a barrister and an LL.D., and
a person of some influence, however, as his threat
to the governor of the women’s prison, and his
treatment of the night editor prove.</p>

<p>In accordance with modern German usage I
have adhered to the original in dropping the
“von,” when intimates of the same social class
are speaking to or of each other, maintaining
it in the more formal intercourse and the reports
tendered by social inferiors.</p>

<p>Readers should note that in the currency now
prevailing, the amounts staked by Hull and his
friends would be tens of thousands, and his total
losses would run into many millions.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_6">[6]</span></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_7">[7]</span>

<p class="ph2">DR. MABUSE</p>

<h2 class="nobreak">I</h2>
</div>


<p><span class="smcap">The</span> distinguished-looking elderly gentleman introduced
himself and, as usual, nobody caught
the name. He wore a suit of fashionable and
well-cut clothes, however, and his scarf-pin was
a single white pearl in a somewhat quaint setting,
its dazzling purity recalling the whiteness of a
lovely blonde’s shoulders, as Karstens remarked.
Moreover, he at once placed a sum of twenty
thousand marks upon the table in front of him.</p>

<p>He had been brought to the club by young
Hull, the heir to an industrial concern worth
millions, into which his father allowed him to
dip freely. Play was started immediately, and
the stranger courteously agreed to the game
proposed, which was vingt-et-un. The stakes were
unlimited, and the first one to hold the bank
was Ritter.</p>

<p>At first there was nothing unusual about the
game. Gains and losses alternated, but soon it
was noticed that Hull was losing, and this began
just at the time when it was the elderly gentleman’s
turn to play banker. At the start it was
hundred-mark notes that Hull lost, but he played
on calmly, resigned to his ill-luck. Notes of<span class="pagenum" id="Page_8">[8]</span>
smaller value were now mingled with the piles
of thousands the visitor had put in front of him.</p>

<p>It was only outwardly, however, that Hull
appeared undisturbed. He felt a good deal of
excitement within, and a veil seemed to be
obscuring his mental vision. His bank-notes
fluttered across to the stranger without his appearing
aware of the fact. His senses seemed to be
imprisoned in a delicate, invisible web, pressing
ever more and more closely upon him.</p>

<p>He drank a brandy and soda, and then ordered
a bottle of champagne. The only effect of that
was to make him open another compartment of
his pocket-book and bring out the thousand-mark
notes which he had procured from the bank that
morning. His bad luck became really fantastic.
Even when he held good cards it seemed as if
in some obscure region of his mind a mysterious
warning sealed his lips, and instead of staking
a substantial sum, he wagered a trifling amount
merely.</p>

<p>It was now the visitor’s turn to pass on the
office of banker, but he volunteered to continue
to hold it on account of Hull. He said: “If you
gentlemen do not object, I will remain banker
for a few more rounds. You see how the money
seems to cling to me. I am the guest of your
hospitable club, so please consider how difficult
my position is with regard to Herr von Hull, and
grant my request.” His speech was polite, and
carefully enunciated, yet there was a masterful
ring about the words, as if the speaker would
brook no refusal.</p>

<p>The club attendant eyed the guest suspiciously,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_9">[9]</span>
but he was using the cards provided by the club
and fresh packs were opened every time. The
play grew more animated. A good deal had
been drunk, and several round the table were
slightly intoxicated. The guest did not refrain
from drinking, and his behaviour was in no way
peculiar. He had a steady and lingering glance
for everyone who looked at him, and his large
grey eyes seemed to have something dominating
about them, hardly in accordance with a mere
game. His hands were large and fleshy, and as
steady as if carved out of wood, while the fingers
of the other men, far younger than he, were
already quivering with excitement.</p>

<p>Hull continued playing, though his pocket-book
grew lighter and lighter. “What is the matter
with me?” he continually asked himself. He
wanted to rise from the table and miss a round,
so that he could get a mouthful of fresh
air at the window and gain a little calm from
looking into the silent night. But he sat as if
glued to his chair, pressing his elbows down on
the crimson cloth, and his thoughts escaped his
control, falling into a void like that of deep
slumber.</p>

<p>And yet he was not really a reckless player.
He was accustomed to reflect and to follow the
run of luck, making use of chances that were
favourable to him, and reducing his stakes when
he saw that the odds were against him.</p>

<p>This evening, however, he seemed to know no
bounds. No amount seemed of any value in his
eyes, and it appeared as if he were almost glad
to lose, and saw his notes change hands with<span class="pagenum" id="Page_10">[10]</span>
a kind of satisfaction. Something would be sure
to happen ere long. The players seemed far too
slow in dealing, he thought; they took an endless
time in declaring their stakes, and the notes
crawled round the table at a snail’s pace.</p>

<p>He drank freely, moreover, and the fancies which
he could no longer control were like fiery steeds
escaping the driver’s restraining hand and running
away into a trackless wilderness. The very air
seemed to have been exhausted, and nothing existed
for him but the game.</p>

<p>Folks began to discuss his bad luck. He
certainly drew unlucky cards, but he was playing
his hand badly, and taking unreasonable risks.
His friends wanted to restrict the stakes and talk
of the final round. At first Hull did not take in
what they were saying, and they had to explain
their words; then he drew himself up and became
furiously angry, shouting in his wrath and beating
his fist on the table.</p>

<p>Then the stranger’s big eyes seemed to withdraw
a little from him and the rest; their glance
appeared to be directed inward and some of their
lustre vanished. He laid down his cards and put
his money into his pocket, doing it carelessly, however,
as if it were merely a handkerchief. There
was one more round to finish. Hull called out,
“I’ll play the bank,” and the stranger dealt him
the cards. He glanced at them quickly. His
total was twenty-one.... Then something happened,
something strange and inexplicable. He
threw his cards face downwards upon the heap,
saying, “I have lost again.”</p>

<p>The guest immediately showed <i>his</i> cards. His<span class="pagenum" id="Page_11">[11]</span>
eyes regained their glitter, he counted his points,
named the total, and threw his cards down on
the table.</p>

<p>It seemed to Hull as if he were falling from an
unsteady foothold down into an abyss below.
“What have I been doing?” he asked himself
in stupefaction and despair. Now at last he began
to see everything as clearly as if he had just
come into the room: the three glowing electric
globes under their protecting dome, the red-covered,
lighted table, his friends, the elderly
stranger, the scattered cards and the piles of
notes.</p>

<p>“Where have I been? What have I been
doing?” he stammered.</p>

<p>His brain grew alert again, and the thoughts
that had been so confused and obscure now became
suddenly clear: it was as if he had drawn aside
the curtains and let in the light of day. Then he
felt a sudden distrust of himself, which made him
uneasy. He held his head in his hands awhile,
striving to free it from the weight that seemed
to encircle it, and then raising himself erect, he
said, “What have I been doing? I held twenty-one
in my hand, and then someone called out, in my
voice, ‘I have lost again.’ Look there!” He
snatched the cards he had thrown away from the
heap where they lay, and turned them over. They
were an ace, a ten, and a knave—twenty-one!</p>

<p>The elderly stranger’s large grey eyes contracted
until the pupils were quite small and seemed to
be gazing at a far-distant spot. A shudder went
through his body; it was perceptible, though
hastily subdued. Then his breast expanded and<span class="pagenum" id="Page_12">[12]</span>
his breath came slowly and with difficulty, as if
he were having to pump the air direct into himself.</p>

<p>“Too late!” said he, briefly and decisively.</p>

<p>Hull made a slight gesture.</p>

<p>“My remark had nothing to do with you,” he
said quietly; “it concerned myself only. How
much do I owe you?” he asked in a friendly tone.</p>

<p>“Thirty thousand marks!”</p>

<p>Hull emptied his pocket-book.</p>

<p>“You must content yourself till to-morrow afternoon
with ten thousand and, of course, an I O U for
the rest. Will you be so good as to write the
amount and your address in this notebook?”</p>

<p>When Hull got his little notebook back, he
read in it:</p>

<p class="center"><span class="indentright">BALLING,</span><br/>

<span class="smcap">Room 15, Excelsior Hotel</span>.</p>

<p>He passed over his I O U, smiling pleasantly as
he did so.</p>

<p>“I am ready to give you your revenge, Herr von
Hull,” said Balling, as he rose. “Gentlemen, may
I offer you my thanks for the evening’s hospitality?
Good-night!”</p>

<p>He said this almost abruptly, but in so decisive
a tone that it brought the others to their feet.
Karstens offered him his car.</p>

<p>“No, thank you; my own is waiting for me.”</p>

<p>He walked away somewhat stiffly, as though
tired out, and vouchsafed no further farewell of
any sort. The club attendant conducted him to
the outer door.</p>

<p>“Hull, you are off your head,” said Karstens,
when the stranger had left the room.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_13">[13]</span>“What did really happen?” asked Hull quietly.</p>

<p>“Ask your purse!”</p>

<p>“My pocket-book is empty. Who won all my
money?”</p>

<p>“Your friend there,” said Karstens, pointing to
the door.</p>

<p>“My friend! I never set eyes on him before!
How did he get here?”</p>

<p>“Hull, you certainly are needing the services
of a good physician. Emil, bring the telephone
directory.” Karstens turned over the leaves.
“Here we are: Dr. Schramm, Psychopathological
treatment, 35, Ludwigstrasse....”</p>

<p>“I don’t understand your joke, my dear
Karstens.”</p>

<p>“Well, who brought this fine vingt-et-un player
here but you?”</p>

<p>“That is not true, Karstens.”</p>

<p>“Go to No. 35, Ludwigstrasse, my dear fellow,
and quickly too.”</p>

<p>“Of course it was you who brought him, Hull,”
said another.</p>

<p>“<i>I?</i> <i>I</i> brought him? At any rate, I don’t
remember a thing about it, but it may be so.”</p>

<p>Hull then withdrew, exhausted and stupefied,
brooding over the problem which had so strangely
and suddenly opened up before him that evening.</p>

<p>When he awoke, towards morning, he had a
dim and fleeting remembrance, and he seemed to
recall the stranger sitting at the same table with
him in the Café Bastin. He had an idea that they
had been talking together, and that it was about
the theatre, but what they had said, and which
theatre it was about, he had not the slightest idea.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_14">[14]</span>
In the dim recesses of his mind he recalled merely
the sensation of a dazzling reflector that seemed
to throw its beams upon him during the conversation.
Sleep was no longer possible, but, try
as he would to pierce these elusive fragments of
memory and penetrate to the reality behind them,
he was quite unable to make anything out of
them.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>The next afternoon brought him no enlightenment
either. By four o’clock he had obtained the twenty
thousand marks, and he made his way to the Excelsior
Hotel. At his request a telephone message was
sent to Room 15. Herr Balling was there, he
was told, and requested the gentleman to send up
his card. This Hull did, following close upon it.</p>

<p>In the middle of Room 15 he found a man
whom he had never seen in his life before. He
was a short, stout, clean-shaven man, apparently
an American. He made a very stiff bow.</p>

<p>“I beg your pardon,” said Hull. “I must
have been directed wrongly. I wanted Room 15.”</p>

<p>“This is it,” said the other.</p>

<p>“Then Herr Balling must have given me the
wrong number.”</p>

<p>“My name is Balling.”</p>

<p>“This time I am <i>not</i> dreaming, I am in full
possession of my senses,” said Hull to himself,
and then aloud, he continued: “But the mystery
can soon be explained. Did you write this?”
and he extended the notebook in which the stranger
of the previous night had written his name and
address.</p>

<p>“Certainly not,” replied the stout man.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_15">[15]</span>“Then I am not in your debt to the tune of
twenty thousand marks?”</p>

<p>“My time is very limited, and I am expecting
a friend on business,” said the other, looking at
his watch.</p>

<p>“I will make way for your friend, sir, at once,
and will only put one more question to you. It
is not my fault that I am bothering you; I have
been misled in some way.”</p>

<p>The other nodded.</p>

<p>“Possibly you are acquainted,” Hull went on,
“with a gentleman of about sixty, with large grey
eyes, a big nose and white whiskers. He wears
good and well-cut clothes and a tall grey hat, and
his name is also Balling.”</p>

<p>“I can only repeat that I know nothing about
him,” said the Balling of No. 15.</p>

<p>Hull thereupon took his leave. Downstairs he
asked whether there were a second Herr Balling
in the hotel, but the answer was “No.” Had
Room 15 been occupied by any Herr Balling who
had just left? “No.” Was the writing in the
pocket-book known? Again there was a negative
reply. “For the first time in my life,” thought
Hull, “I find myself unable to pay a debt of
honour.”</p>

<p>Gradually he became uneasy. What a
mysterious affair this was! Nothing of the kind
had ever occurred before. He had won money
and lost it again ... sometimes much, and at
other times little. He had been in financial
straits. He had had some trouble about a girl he
cared for. Once, indeed, he had been seriously
wounded in a duel. Yet all that was comprehensible<span class="pagenum" id="Page_16">[16]</span>
and straightforward, so to speak. But
this tale of Herr Balling and the twenty thousand
marks had some mystery or other behind it. He
had forgotten that it was he who introduced the
stranger to the club. He had played as if he had
lost his head. He had incurred a debt of twenty
thousand marks, and his creditor had furnished a
name and address which did actually exist but were
not his, and, moreover, he would not have the
money....</p>

<p>If it had not happened that Hull had no mistress
at the moment, he could have talked this affair
over. He pondered over it alone while he walked
along Lenbach Square and the Promenade, looking
everybody in the face in the hope that he might
encounter the distinguished stranger among them.
He went to the Café Bastin and scanned all the
faces there. He sat down at a table and waited
to see whether the <i>genius loci</i> would be favourable
to him and recall the vanished recollections; but
nothing came of it, and he stood up again, a prey
to increasing uneasiness. It seemed as if in the
invisible depths behind him another power, extraneous
to himself, was pursuing him, pressing down
upon him, trying to jump on his back as a monkey
might do, and lead him into unlucky adventures
of some kind or another.</p>

<p>Hull forced himself to return to his lonely
bachelor chambers. There he met Karstens, and
greeted him with relief. But Karstens at once
asked:</p>

<p>“Well, has your memory returned?”</p>

<p>“My dear fellow, there’s something wrong with
me!”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_17">[17]</span>“With the twenty thousand marks?”</p>

<p>“No, there they are!” and he tapped his breast-pocket.
“Nobody wants them, it appears. There
is a Herr Balling in Room 15 at the ‘Excelsior,’
but he isn’t my man, and we’ve never met before.
He has never played vingt-et-un, and nobody owes
<i>him</i> twenty thousand marks. I can’t get rid of the
money, and it makes me feel creepy! Something is
going to happen to me. Who <i>is</i> there near me
whom I cannot see? There’s certainly something
wrong with me!”</p>

<p>“Come to the club! Perhaps your Herr Balling
will go there to fetch the money himself.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but what about the real Balling
in No. 15?”</p>

<p>“Well, that’s certainly odd, I grant you. Come
along.”</p>

<p>“All right. Perhaps he’ll be there.”</p>

<p>In the club that night there was no play. The
curious circumstance had so worked upon the
members’ imagination that no one felt the need
of trying his luck. Hull was overwhelmed with
well-meaning or obtuse advice.</p>

<p>“Emil,” said one of them to the attendant,
“what did his car look like?”</p>

<p>“An excellent one, Herr Baron, a twenty-horsepower
at the least—a closed car with a body like
a royal cradle, if one may use such a comparison
nowadays ... so smooth and well rounded and
polished. It started off with a great bound, and
soon vanished. It was a first-class car. I kept
a close eye on the gentleman, and I saw that he
had the devil’s own luck when he played against
Herr von Hull. He played quite straight, however.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_18">[18]</span>They learnt nothing more about the stranger.
Nobody came either to the club or to Hull’s rooms
to ask for the twenty thousand marks or to offer
him his revenge.</p>

<p>A few days afterwards Hull made acquaintance
with a girl who was performing jazz dances in the
Bonbonnière. She was partly Mexican, she told
him. She soon effected a diversion in his thoughts,
and in her company he rapidly got rid of the
twenty thousand marks which he could not pay
over to the stranger.</p>

<p>“It seems as if you were meant to give the
money to a woman instead of to a man,” remarked
Karstens, when he told him that he was
now free of his worries once more.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_19">[19]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">II</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">About</span> a fortnight later the circles to whom the
life of the day is only a wearisome burden till the
hour of play arrives, when the nerve-tension is
once more excited, were all agog with the stories
of a stranger who simply loaded himself with
money wherever he chanced to play. The tales
varied constantly. At one time the stranger was
a young sportsman, at another a worthy provincial;
now he was a fair-bearded man looking like an
artist, and again a robber and murderer who had
escaped from justice. Some said he was a
dethroned prince, others that he was a Frenchman.
Another time they declared him to be a citizen
of Leipzig, who was smuggling pit-coal from the
Saar into Bavaria by way of Switzerland, or profiteering
on the money exchange with New York
and Rio de Janeiro. There was endless variety
in the descriptions, but the imagination put the
various forms together and made one personality
out of them.</p>

<p>Circles that were exclusive had ceased to exist.
Money was a key that opened all doors, the
wearing of a fur coat could conceal any calling,
and a diamond scarf-pin shed lustre on any
character. A man could go into whatsoever
company he desired.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_20">[20]</span>There was no longer any sense of security, and
the mysterious gambler might turn up in any place,
at any time. He might be anybody’s neighbour.
The authorities were constantly notified of
swindling players, and though in no case could
their swindles be proved, their luck was so continuous
that it did not seem possible for it to
be due to ordinary play.</p>

<p>Through the Bonbonnière lady Hull frequently
spent his evenings in places where gambling was
indulged in. He heard much about this swindler
at play, and from many different quarters, for
theatrical folk are always particularly interested
in anything out of the common, especially where
masquerading is concerned. But Hull’s brain was of
a matter-of-fact and ordinary kind. He did, indeed,
still think about the twenty thousand marks, but
mostly with the comfortable reflection that they had
been used in a very different way from that for
which they were destined. Now that the story
of his forgetfulness had ceased to haunt him he
had become quite convinced that his friends had
played an elaborate trick upon him, that his I O U
and the twenty thousand marks had been discharged,
and the only disreputable part in the affair had
been played by Balling, who, on account of Emil’s
watch upon him, had not felt himself secure. His
astonishment was all the greater, therefore, when
a certain Herr von Wenk was announced and
the story of that night’s escapade was brought
up once more.</p>

<p>Hull refused to discuss the matter, but the visitor
told him he was a State Attorney and showed
his credentials. In the most polite way possible<span class="pagenum" id="Page_21">[21]</span>
he continued to question him, saying that his official
status obliged him to pursue the inquiry. Had
Hull been able to communicate with Cara Carozza,
his <i>chère amie</i> from the Bonbonnière, instead of
having to face this man by himself, he would have
known what to say and how much to conceal. He
was greatly enamoured of Cara Carozza, and by
no means inclined to go into this matter and rake
up bygones for the sake of the country’s morals.</p>

<p>“You will pardon my introducing a personal
note, but I understand that you are very intimate
with Mdlle. Cara Carozza, of the Bonbonnière?”</p>

<p>“Good Lord! He knows that, does he?”
ejaculated Hull to himself.</p>

<p>“Can you make me acquainted with this lady?
It would further the task which the State has laid
upon me, but I would ask you to introduce me to
her as a private individual. It is unnecessary to
assure you that I take you for a man of irreproachable
character and quite above suspicion. Nothing
is known to the detriment of the lady, either. You
will be able to render a service to the country
and perhaps to yourself as well. Henceforward you
are under the direct protection of the police. Do
not be uneasy; it is possibly quite an unnecessary
precaution. You can rest assured that you will
not suffer in any way through the services you
may be able to render to the general public and
the State.”</p>

<p>“What am I to gather from all this, sir?”
said Hull hesitatingly.</p>

<p>“You must have come to some conclusion about
your extraordinarily lucky opponent?”</p>

<p>“To be quite candid, I did feel uneasy for a<span class="pagenum" id="Page_22">[22]</span>
time, Herr von Wenk. There seemed to be something
very mysterious about the affair. Finally,
I imagined that my forgetting that I had brought
the stranger to the club was a feeble joke on the
part of my friends.”</p>

<p>“But the Herr Balling in the hotel, who was
quite different from the Balling at the club?”</p>

<p>“That certainly is a mystery to me still, but
a false address is often given for the purpose of
evading payment. In this case, however, it
occurred in order to avoid receiving twenty
thousand marks.”</p>

<p>“May it not be explained,” continued the
State Attorney, “by the fact that this elderly
gentleman had been cheating in some way? He
was set on his guard by some fact unknown to you,
and contented himself with the money he had
already won. He gave a name which occurred to
him, and of which he had some knowledge.
Unless, of course, the Balling in the ‘Excelsior’
was the Balling from your club, disguised. But you
say that the one was short and stout and the other
of rather imposing presence. Do you still play,
Herr von Hull?”</p>

<p>“A little, now and again.”</p>

<p>“With Mdlle. Carozza, perhaps? I am on
friendly terms with one of your intimates, with
Karstens. He will introduce me to you, and
we shall be able to renew our acquaintance socially.
You must not be prejudiced by the fact that it
has had an official beginning. I hope to be able
to count you on my side.”</p>

<p>The barrister took his leave, and returned to
his official chambers.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_23">[23]</span>A month previous to this occurrence, in a
lawsuit in which he was professionally engaged,
Wenk had first noted the extent to which
the gambling fever possessed the city. He himself
liked the nervous excitement and the appeal
to the imagination afforded by the relations between
judge, counsel and accused in the course of his
calling. In earlier years he had been a regular
card-player. He was not a passionate lover of
games of chance, but he enjoyed the opportunity
of testing the effect of play upon his own self-control,
of observing his fellows and noting the
enticement afforded by the devious course of luck.</p>

<p>During the lawsuit above mentioned he realized
what a danger to the people lay in gambling. The
change from war conditions to a state of affairs
which afforded the nation little relief from tension
had not sobered its imagination, but rather excited it
yet more strongly. Perhaps, in the first instance,
the war news was largely responsible for extravagant
phantasies. For a week, sometimes a month,
at a time the reports were like a lottery for the
whole nation. Then a fateful movement was set
on foot by which whole districts of people were
seized with a passion for gambling, a movement
designed by the military authorities to induce them
to replete the army coffers. Increased wages were
offered to the war workers and money was flung
into manufacturing concerns. Commerce of all
kinds was affected ere long, and everywhere the
flood-gates were opened. When goods grew more
and more scarce, money overflowed all its channels.
Wenk saw clearly that the folks in high places
who had believed they could purchase the soul<span class="pagenum" id="Page_24">[24]</span>
of a nation for money were to blame for the
tragic outcome of the war as far as Germany was
concerned, and so, too, were they responsible for
the political development. Instead of the ideal of
an immortal soul prepared for any and every
renunciation as long as it fulfilled its duty to the
community, they had set up an idol—money—and
the whole nation was worshipping it.</p>

<p>Then the war came to an end. Money decreased
in value and the idea of it played a yet more
dominant part in the life of a nation now deprived
of its success and brilliance in the world outside.
Hundreds of thousands had become accustomed to
a life of inaction, and for many years now it had
been nothing but pure chance whether they lived
or died. Their only preoccupation had been to
exercise authority over others and to live entirely
on their nerves. They brought with them to
the more stable conditions of life the gambling
spirit born of their war experience. They had
grown accustomed to taking risks, and they continued
to rely on luck. They resumed their former
mode of life, but brought to it the atmosphere
of their recent experiences, transferring the nerve-racking
and hazardous existence of those days to
the conditions which now obtained. To some
extent this was inevitable, but those who looked
beyond the present and wanted to see a new era
of prosperity dawn must strain every nerve and
exercise the strictest self-denial. Thus only could
there be hope of recovery.</p>

<p>The great lawsuit had afforded Wenk one
example after another of the development of this
spirit of gambling, and in its course had taken<span class="pagenum" id="Page_25">[25]</span>
him frequently into the company of those who
lived but for, and by, games of chance. His
convictions were well grounded and his recognition
of the national danger constantly confirmed to an
alarming extent. In the attics and basements folks
were gambling for five-mark pieces, and on the first
floors for five-thousand. They laid their wagers in
the streets and the lanes, at home and abroad. They
gambled with cards, with goods, with ideas and
with enjoyments, with power and with weakness,
with themselves and with their nearest and dearest.</p>

<p>At this period, too, people who were not naturally
given to hazardous risks, who were habitually calm
and self-reliant, were wont to be guided by chance
conditions and circumstances, instead of combating
them where necessary.</p>

<p>Wenk was an official who had reached his thirty-eighth
year in a peaceful and well-ordered career.
During the war he had volunteered for the
Flying Corps, because he had a love of sport
and remembered the fascination which the element
of danger had held for him in early youth. The
experience had fired his imagination, and he
returned to his career with more impetuous feelings
than had been his when he quitted it. The lawsuit
against the gamblers, and all he had learned in
the course of it, had excited him considerably.
He had gone at once to the head of the Police
Department, had described what he had seen and
experienced, and represented to him that this new
disease must be combated if the whole body were
not to be destroyed. As money lost its value and
the necessities of life increased, the nation could
do nothing but seek to augment its mass of paper<span class="pagenum" id="Page_26">[26]</span>
currency by trying first one speculation and then
another. The connection between supply and
demand required both time and work before it
could become normal again, and so by degrees
it had come about that the pulsations of commercial
life were regulated merely by chance.</p>

<p>The Minister smiled; he was new to his office.
He said, “The nation is sound enough; you are
a pessimist!”</p>

<p>But Wenk replied, “It is diseased and rotten!
How can it be healthy, after such years and such
a life?”</p>

<p>Then the Minister, who felt his position somewhat
insecure and was willing to try anything that
might lead to stability, yielded the point, and
created a new post, which Wenk at once took
over.</p>

<p>The erstwhile State Attorney and official was
at once caught up in the vortex of his new office.
He devoted all his time and energies to it. He
did not establish himself in an arm-chair in a
comfortable well-furnished room, but began to build
up his position from the very bottom, became a
police-spy and a detective, unwearied in his
efforts to collect all the evidence he could lay
his hands on. He did it all himself, and when he
realized, as he soon did, the slight extent of his
own powers when pitted against the widespread
national vice, he conceived the idea of recruiting
a guard and rallying force from the ranks of
the victims.</p>

<p>Accordingly, he began with men whose wealth
was not displayed in their houses, but who, through
their connection with the social order which had<span class="pagenum" id="Page_27">[27]</span>
come to grief, had been forced into the opposition,
both as human beings and as politicians. He
knew that none were more responsible for the
existing state of affairs than these men, because, at
a time when resistance was a necessity, they had
been cowardly and kept out of the way. But he
knew, too, that in them a new force of decision had
come to birth, that they longed to make good
where they had failed.</p>

<p>Above all, there were the rich young men without
any profession. In the disorganization brought
about in the country by the depreciation and disorder
of the currency, they were unable to carry
on life as before. Their society was permeated
by the “new rich,” who made use of them
because they allowed themselves to be made
use of.</p>

<p>The State Attorney von Wenk had turned
to his whilom comrades, from whom the divers
duties of his office had long separated him, and
the man whom he had first encountered and won
over to his side was Karstens. It was from him
that he had learned all the circumstances of Hull’s
strange and suspicious gambling adventure. He
compared Hull’s story with the other material
which he had hastily collected. Fresh complaints
were constantly being made about swindlers who
worked so cleverly that no taint of suspicion could
attach to them, yet who won so consistently that it
was not conceivable that this could be merely luck.
From some similarities in detail in the various
stories Wenk was inclined to refer all these cases
to a band of swindlers operating in concert, and he
even had the idea that it might all be the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_28">[28]</span>
work of one man. But this was hardly more
than an impression. Hull’s experience was the
strangest and most mysterious of all these cases,
and it was fraught with the greatest danger, but
Wenk had a notion that therein lay the solution
to all the rest.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>After Wenk’s departure, Hull held a long argument
with himself. The uncompromising yet
thoroughly courteous way in which Wenk had
effected an entrance had made an impression upon
him. He guessed what the official desired, for
he himself was often dissatisfied with his way of
living, although his love of ease usually made him
drive such thoughts away.</p>

<p>Under ordinary circumstances he would have
pursued his usual search for enjoyment without
restraint or reflection, either until considerations
of health had set a limit to his dissipations or
until a marriage, either arranged or entered into
voluntarily, had caused him to “range himself.”</p>

<p>Hull by no means approved of the course of
affairs in Germany which had led to the Treaty
of Versailles. He at once asked himself, “Where
were you in 1918, when the retreat began? and
earlier still, when it first began to be planned?
Are not you, Hull, and all your kind, responsible
for it?”... That was what Herr von Wenk’s
words had implied.</p>

<p>But Hull found in himself no trace of such
individuality as might have saved the situation,
and he dismissed these ideas from his mind. He
drove to see Cara Carozza and told her of Wenk’s
visit.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_29">[29]</span>“For God’s sake, don’t get us mixed up with
your State Attorney, dear Eddie,” said she.</p>

<p>“But ... but ... do we cheat? Are we
dishonest? Are we profiteers, or climbers? We
merely keep ourselves going. What are you
thinking about, darling?”</p>

<p>“Eddie, a game of cards in full swing—someone
holding the bank—closed doors, and a State
official looking on! That might prove a hanging
matter!”</p>

<p>“But I promised him I would bring you!”</p>

<p>“More fool you!” she exclaimed. “You ought
to have got out of it somehow. Elsie is bringing
her friend to-day, and we are going to Schramm’s.
Karstens has already telephoned that he will be
there.”</p>

<p>“Then Wenk would be coming anyhow, so <i>that’s</i>
all right, as it happens!”</p>

<p>The head-waiter of Schramm’s little restaurant,
recently opened in one of the residential streets
and decorated throughout in most eccentric style
by a modern professional, led Karstens and Wenk
from the dinner-table to a box at the rear. Thence
a winding stair led to a room which had no other
exit and seemed to have no windows of any kind.</p>

<p>In the middle of the room stood a fairly large
table of an oval shape, but so arranged that every
occupant of an arm-chair was sitting in a hollowed-out
niche of his own, with the leaves of the table
under his elbows on both sides. The table was
formed of quaint, curiously veined Kiefersfeld
marble. In the middle only was there a perfectly
white oval left. Around the table, behind the
players’ chairs, the floor was raised and the walls<span class="pagenum" id="Page_30">[30]</span>
furnished with full-length reclining lounges, upon
which rested crushed-strawberry-coloured cushions
with black designs. A large shade of polished
glass attached to a brass electrolier hung low
over the table and reflected the electric light
bulbs which gleamed forth from silver brackets.
The walls above the strawberry-coloured cushions
were inlaid with the same warm marble as that
on the table.</p>

<p>Wenk was introduced to Cara Carozza.</p>

<p>“I could not keep the secret, Herr von Wenk.
I was obliged to tell my lady friend here. Please
don’t be vexed with me!”</p>

<p>Wenk gave a slight bow, in which there was a
trace of annoyance.</p>

<p>Baccarat was being played. Karstens turned to
Wenk: “The young man with the fair beard
is the only stranger. All the others play here
regularly.”</p>

<p>Wenk glanced at the stranger and met his eyes.
He noticed that they were fastened on him, and
he immediately looked beyond and above them,
but he felt that the stranger had noticed they were
speaking of him. Whenever he looked at him
again he found that his eyes were fixed on the
table.</p>

<p>The stranger played a quiet, restrained game.
He frequently lost. Then Wenk ceased to pay
attention to him and turned to the others, whom
he watched in turns. They all had their eyes
fastened on the white oval, whereon the cards were
being dealt. They seldom looked in any other
direction. There were gentlemen in evening dress,
ladies in <i>décolletée</i>, expensively and fashionably<span class="pagenum" id="Page_31">[31]</span>
attired. The passion for gambling had seized and
carried them all away.</p>

<p>“It is none of these,” said Wenk to himself,
“so it can only be that young man with the sandy
beard.”</p>

<p>He began to study him afresh, but only to find
that the latter returned his gaze. Wenk then turned
his attention to Cara Carozza. He saw her wholly
given over to her game, sitting next to Hull, to
whose money she helped herself when she lost.
If she won, however, she added the winnings to
her own heap. In the player on her other side
Wenk thought he recognized a well-known tenor
from the State Theatre, whose picture often
appeared in shop-windows.</p>

<p>“Is that Marker?” he asked Karstens, who
nodded in reply.</p>

<p>Wenk won a trifling sum. He played only till
he had persuaded himself that there was no work
for him here. Then he gave up his place to an
elderly gentleman who had already been sitting
behind him for some time, boring him by remarks
upon his method of play. He seated himself on
one of the lounges and watched the play for a
short time longer. Then he took his departure,
Karstens accompanying him. Hull remained with
the Carozza girl.</p>

<p>When Wenk had descended a few steps he
looked back at the table. It seemed as if the
fair-bearded man with large mouse-grey eyes
followed his departure eagerly, and then directed
an urgent and threatening look towards Carozza,
but it might have been only an illusion.</p>

<p>When Wenk reached the foot of the stairs, he<span class="pagenum" id="Page_32">[32]</span>
unexpectedly found himself for a moment face to
face with a lady who had already laid her hand
on the balustrade to ascend. He looked right
into her eyes and started back in amazement, while
he inclined his head, as if doing homage, before
he passed on. He wanted to say to Karstens,
“I have never seen so beautiful a woman!” but
that seemed to him like betraying a secret, and,
consumed with desire, he bore her image with
him as he made his way silently through the
deserted streets. When at home, he soon fell
asleep, but the two mouse-grey eyes, which were
far older than the carefully arranged sandy beard,
seemed to fasten on his breast as he slept. They
appeared to be trying to colour the ace of hearts
with his own life-blood.</p>

<p>When he awoke next morning he was conscious
of nothing but an intense longing to meet once
more the lady he had encountered on the stairs.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_33">[33]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">III</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> next night Wenk was invited to a <i>soirée
musicale</i> in the neighbourhood of Schramm’s
restaurant. A young pianist was performing
modern phantasies. Wenk was bored, became
fidgety and was the prey to wandering thoughts.
It seemed to him as if he were neglecting some
special opportunity elsewhere. He grew so uneasy
that he finally slipped away, merely leaving a
card of apology for his hostess.</p>

<p>He reached Schramm’s and was about to pass
quickly by. Then it occurred to him to look
up at the first floor of the villa where the new
restaurant and gaming-house was established, and
try to see the windows of the little room in which
he had played the previous night. The ground-floor
windows were large, and through their old-gold
curtains a faint light gleamed, but the four
windows on the first floor showed no signs of
occupation. Yet he said to himself, “Behind those
unlighted windows there gleams light ... <i>her</i>
light,” and he went in, full of hope that he might
encounter the mysterious lady who had so bewitched
him.</p>

<p>The head-waiter approached him at once, took
hat and coat, whispering, “The marble table?”
and looking closely at the visitor as he did so.
Wenk gave a nod of assent, and the head-waiter<span class="pagenum" id="Page_34">[34]</span>
rapidly preceded him to the back, Wenk following
more leisurely. Then he was led up the winding
stair.</p>

<p>The first person he saw at the gaming-table
was the sandy-bearded man. He sat in his
niche, his broad shoulders bent forward, with his
eyes fixed in a steady gaze upon a player opposite.
His attitude was that of a beast of prey who has
already played his victim and is only waiting to
pounce upon him. He seemed to be all sinews—at
least, that was the impression he made upon
Wenk, who started back at his aspect.</p>

<p>There was one empty seat. Wenk took it and
drew out his pocket-book. An idea crossed his
mind, that something special had occurred at
the table. He saw all the players cowering over
the little heaps of money in front of them, and
yet there was in them all a distinct, even if unintentional,
glance given to one among their number.</p>

<p>The sandy-bearded stranger was holding the
bank, and now he looked up. Wenk noticed how,
at first, annoyed at the disturbance, he raised
his eyes towards him, and then it was clearly
noticeable that his face quivered. At the same
moment, however, he closed his jaws so firmly
that his beard stood out round them. The rest
was a mere impression, but this Wenk saw clearly.
A shudder went through him as if at some sudden
and dangerous encounter. At this moment the
“banker” displayed the cards he held. Someone
said, “Basch has lost again!” All turned
to look openly at the pale thin man whom they
had been furtively regarding when Wenk entered.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_35">[35]</span>With a quiet and drowsy movement Basch
pushed the notes lying on the oval in front of
him over to the stranger. He grabbed at them
like a bird of prey. The loser sank back in his
seat, and in the same slow and dreamy way he
brought out a fresh thousand-mark note and laid
it in front of him.</p>

<p>“How much are you losing now?” said a
lady from the divan behind Basch. “You will
have a lucky life. When one loses to <i>that</i> extent!
I regard you as a champion. You must establish
a record.... In losing, you know! Then you
will be so lucky in life that I shall want to....”
She broke off in embarrassment. Then Wenk,
with a delicious tremor in his veins, recognized
the speaker as the lady whom he had so
abruptly encountered on the stairs on the previous
evening.</p>

<p>“Get ready to stake,” said the sandy-bearded
man in a harsh voice, drowning the speaker’s
concluding words.</p>

<p>Basch had not answered her. As the banker
called out, he merely made a movement of his
hand over his thousand-mark note, a movement
as if he were secretly conjuring it to do his
bidding.</p>

<p>He looked at his cards; it was his turn, and
no one else was punting.</p>

<p>“Do you take one?” said the banker sharply.</p>

<p>Basch shook his head dreamily. Wenk noticed
Cara Carozza’s auburn-tressed head behind one
the spectators, but his glance always returned
to the other woman.</p>

<p>The banker bought a Court card and disclosed<span class="pagenum" id="Page_36">[36]</span>
his own hand. He had only a total of four.
Basch, too, with a feverish movement, laid his
on the table. His points were but three.</p>

<p>“He plays as if he were drugged!” whispered
Wenk’s neighbour. “To hold three, and yet not
take a card! What folly!”</p>

<p>As he raked in his gains the sandy-bearded
stranger gave a hasty glance at Wenk. The latter
felt himself pitted against the winner. He increased
his stakes, won, then lost for several
rounds, and won again.</p>

<p>Basch continued to lose every time. By degrees
Wenk ranged himself more and more on his side.
He staked his money as if it were a weapon for
Basch against the stranger, a weapon with which
to strike him down.</p>

<p>Wenk noticed that the latter looked at no one
but himself and Basch. He therefore accepted
the challenge, and threw himself eagerly and wholeheartedly
into the struggle, impelled by some
mysterious power that incited him against the
banker. He forgot himself altogether, and no
longer played for the purpose of observing and
discovering. He abandoned himself to the game
and played like all those whom he had come to
rescue from the gaming-table. He even forgot
the lovely lady. When he first realized this, he
was ashamed, and for the first time during the
evening he glanced round the room to see whether
Hull were there.</p>

<p>But it was not Hull who now sat behind Cara
Carozza. Wenk’s search was vain; Hull was
not present. Cara sat with a stranger behind
a player with whom she was sharing the stakes.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_37">[37]</span>
Then Wenk came to himself. He stopped playing
and at once left the hall, sorely vexed with himself.
When he was on the winding stair he turned and
saw that the stranger with the fair sandy beard
was also rising from the table.</p>

<p>Wenk had ordered his car to call for him at
the house where the musical party was held, and
did not remember this till he had walked some
distance. Then he retraced his steps and drove
home. He went to bed at once, but he could
get no sleep, for the thought continually recurred
that he had made a mistake to come away,
that he ought to have stayed and talked to
Basch.</p>

<p>He got out of bed again and went through a
bundle of depositions in order to quiet his conscience.
In going through these documents, written
by men who were strangers to him, he got the
impression that all of them, losing so much that
they could not but ascribe it to foul play, must
have sat at the gaming-table very much as Basch
did. Had he remained and behaved in a sensible
fashion, he would have had an opportunity of
seeing for himself at first hand what had hitherto
reached him through the testimony of others.</p>

<p>Then Wenk became thoroughly discouraged. “I
must set to work in quite another way,” he said
to himself. “Goodwill and industry are not
sufficient. Self-denial and inexorable self-discipline
and a little more cunning are necessary!
I must make use of every ruse that my opponent
displays.... I must make use of disguise and
secret spying. I must be prepared to stake myself
on the game ... must be myself the snare, if<span class="pagenum" id="Page_38">[38]</span>
I do not want to be caught in it like a silly
pigeon.... A State official with a false
beard ... a Browning concealed in his fist ...
a jockey-cap, a tall hat, a wig, and so on, like
the cinema stage....”</p>

<p>In the looking-glass he contemplated his clean-shaven
face, finding that when he made grimaces,
drew down the corners of his mouth, stretched
his jaws, and tried the effect of a beard made
out of paper shavings, his features lent themselves
very well to disguise.</p>

<p>The next day he procured a complete outfit
from the Criminal Investigation Department. With
the help of a Secret Service expert, he tried all
the necessary arts, learned to plaster on a beard,
to alter his complexion, make himself look younger
or older, change his appearance by scars, and
so on. He could now make up as a country
cousin, a dispatch-bearing cyclist, a taxicab driver,
a porter, waiter, steward, window-cleaner, an “unemployed,”
and other characters. In the morning
he made an exhaustive examination of the criminal
museum which the police had collected, studied
the photographs he found there, returned to his
various make-ups, and worked with the zeal of
a fanatic.</p>

<p>Thus the day passed, and by evening he felt
he had become a stronger man. He was at once
more discreet and yet more daring. He would
have liked to make a tour at once of all the
gaming-houses in the city.</p>

<p>He went only to Schramm’s, however. He had
long been considering whether he should not appear
there in some sort of disguise, more for the purpose<span class="pagenum" id="Page_39">[39]</span>
of making a trial of it and learning to feel at
home in it than for actually starting upon his
work. He was still more anxious to go in the
hope of meeting the sandy-bearded man again
and seeing him play, for he was desirous of
atoning for his shortcomings of the previous evening,
which had left a painful impression upon his
mind. He would have liked to meet Basch again
and talk to him about the evils of gambling,
from which he had suffered so much. He went,
therefore, just as he was.</p>

<p>It was already late when he got there. Hull
was present, but he saw neither the fair-bearded
stranger nor Basch. He only heard that
the former had left immediately after him, a fact
which all had noticed. After he left, Basch had
remained sitting as if utterly prostrate. He had
not played again, and suddenly he vanished. No
one knew him well. He had never been to
Schramm’s before.</p>

<p>The lady who sat behind him estimated that
his losses must have been thirty to thirty-five
thousand marks. The blond stranger had won
it all, but he did not win until he began to hold
the bank. Everything had been absolutely in
order. The attendant who furnished the cards
was thoroughly reliable.</p>

<p>While talking about the previous night’s play
they stopped their game. Then Cara said:</p>

<p>“There are people who are born players, and
if they take only one card in their hands it is
sure to be an ace. They can do what they like;
the power is stronger than they are; it is their
guiding spirit, their God.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_40">[40]</span>But Elsie did not agree with her. She thought
that every player once in his life came upon a
series of lucky days. They lay stretched out
before him, handed to him by his good fairy,
for every man had a good fairy. One must not
give up expecting to meet with those times of
good fortune, for one day one could gather in
the winnings as quickly as ripe apples in the
autumn....</p>

<p>No one knew the man with the sandy beard.
Basch had brought him to Schramm’s, and the
first evening they had gone away together. He
might be a dethroned prince, he was so imperious
and abrupt in his speech. A dethroned prince
in want of money, no doubt.</p>

<p>“I have a strange feeling,” said Hull, “as
if I had already played against him once....”</p>

<p>“Nonsense!” said Cara.</p>

<p>In his mind the fancy grew stronger. “It is
not so much that I have played with him, but as
if he had done me some very serious internal
injury, affecting my very blood; but how, and
when, and where, I have no idea. It must have
been in a dream.”</p>

<p>“He has evil eyes,” said a woman’s voice,
which Wenk seemed to recognize. He looked in
that direction, but with the bright light on the
table the corner seemed as dark as a cave and
he could descry no one.</p>

<p>Cara answered the voice in the darkness in a
tone that seemed to have anger in it: “Evil
eyes! What do you mean by that? Surely at
the gaming-table no one looks like a saint!”</p>

<p>From the corner there came the words, “He<span class="pagenum" id="Page_41">[41]</span>
seemed to look at Basch like a beast of prey
eyeing his victim!”</p>

<p>“That was exactly the impression he gave me!”
exclaimed Wenk.</p>

<p>He at once rose hastily and went to the corner,
entered the dark niche and started back, for the
speaker was the beautiful unknown! A glow
suffused Wenk’s features and his heart began to
beat violently, as if its strokes must be heard.
Then he pulled himself together, saying, “I really
must be mad! I am searching for a criminal
and am about to fall in love with someone whom
I may have to send to prison to-morrow. This
is really idiotic!” He recovered his presence of
mind, bowed to the stranger and said:</p>

<p>“I should be greatly interested, madam, to hear
how you reached a conclusion which so exactly
resembles my own?”</p>

<p>“It cannot be anything else,” said the lady,
smiling, “than an unusual evidence of secret
sympathy between me and a State official!”</p>

<p>“She knows me, then!” said Wenk to himself
in astonishment. “But how could that come
about, except through Cara Carozza? A State
official, guardian and representative of the law,
and avenger of any breach of it, himself violating
its rules! It was absolutely fantastic. Yes, it
must have been the Carozza girl.” From the niche
he looked into the brilliantly lighted room, where
the dyed tresses of the dancer gleamed forth
between the heads. “So it was you!” he said
to himself; “you want to bring my plans to
nought, you good-for-nothing!...”</p>

<p>Then he remembered the glance the blond had<span class="pagenum" id="Page_42">[42]</span>
given her that first evening, and he ended, “You
are his decoy!” Now he realized the connection
between them. It was the dancer who brought
the blond his victims. He breathed a threat:
“Just you wait; I am taking it all in!”</p>

<p>“Our agreement seems to have struck you
forcibly,” said the lady, interrupting his thoughts.</p>

<p>“As a matter of fact, my thoughts were wandering,
and I beg your pardon, madam,” said Wenk;
“it is incomprehensible that any strange influence
should be able to intervene in <i>your</i> neighbourhood,
but it can be explained, nevertheless....”</p>

<p>He did not continue. Two ideas suddenly obtruded
themselves. This lady was undoubtedly
an excellent observer. If only he could procure
her help! But the other thought stirred his pulses.
Why not abandon all this searching and spying
and following after criminals, and strive to win
the love of a woman such as this, beautiful as
a queen and stately as a goddess! Then he felt
her touching his arm hastily.</p>

<p>“Don’t speak,” she whispered, “I beg of you!”</p>

<p>At the same moment Wenk saw three gentlemen
entering the circle of light in the room. The
first was a young man whom he knew by sight,
for a few days previously he had noticed him
at an exhibition of Futurist paintings, as the buyer
of the most unusual and bizarre of these. He
had asked the name of the purchaser, and the
attendant had replied, “Graf Told bought them.
There he is,” pointing to the young man, who
had just now entered the room.</p>

<p>“Herr von Wenk,” said the lady in a whisper,
“will you do me a great favour?”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_43">[43]</span>“With pleasure, madam. I am at your command.”</p>

<p>“I am anxious to leave this room within the
next few minutes without being seen. Can you
help me to do this?”</p>

<p>“Certainly,” said Wenk.</p>

<p>“How can I accomplish my purpose?”</p>

<p>“That is quite simple. You see the entrance
to that staircase; it is only a few steps to it.
You must look at it well, to be able to find it
in the dark. I am certain that I know where
the electric light switch is. It is just over the
first section of the stairs. I will go there and
turn it out, and you can make use of the darkness
to gain the staircase. When you have passed
me I will stand directly in the way of anyone
who tries to follow you or to reach the switch.”</p>

<p>“Splendid! Thank you very much.”</p>

<p>Her escape was safely made. When Wenk saw
the lady had reached the bottom, he turned the
light on again and entered the room with a light
laugh, saying, “Please forgive me; I did it for
a joke, and I did not realize you would be in
total darkness.”</p>

<p>They all laughed, but the dancer was standing,
pale and disturbed, at the head of the winding stair,
which she had reached at one bound. She recovered
herself quickly and returned to Hull,
begging him to drive her home. Wenk accompanied
them.</p>

<p>As they were about to leave the gaming-hall,
Wenk saw the head-waiter hand Hull an envelope.
He went to an empty table beneath a lamp, opened
it, and drew out a little note. It seemed as if<span class="pagenum" id="Page_44">[44]</span>
an invisible thrust had sent him staggering. Cara
went up to him, but he crumpled up the note,
stuffing it into his pocket, and rose and followed
the others out.</p>

<p>When they had reached the street they parted,
but Hull turned and came back to Wenk, saying,
in a voice trembling with excitement, “I <i>must</i>
speak to you. This very night! Can you see
me at your rooms in an hour’s time? It is
something horrible; I am being shadowed!”</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>“Look at this!” said Hull, as he entered
Wenk’s rooms an hour later. With a despairing
gesture he flung an envelope on Wenk’s table.
The latter opened it and drew a small card from
it. On it there stood:</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">

<p><span class="smcap">Herr Balling</span>,</p>

<p class="center">I O U</p>

<p><span class="indentleft">20,000 (twenty thousand) marks</span><br/>
payable November 21st, 4 p.m.</p>

<p class="right"><span class="smcap">Edgar Hull.</span></p>
</div></div>

<p>“My I O U,” said Hull in a toneless voice, and
after a pause, “Look at the other side!”</p>

<p>On the reverse side Wenk read: “You are
warned. The reason I did not take your twenty
thousand marks is my affair alone. The transaction
lies between you and me. Play is play,
and no State Attorney has anything to do with
it.”</p>

<p>Wenk was staggered. “Yes, yes, yes,” he said,
and found no other words to express the storm
which raged within him. Then after a while,
as he collected himself, he said:</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_45">[45]</span>“We sat near him, you and I! We could
have seized him by the arm, one on each side,
you ... and I! Do you understand?”</p>

<p>“I am shadowed!” whispered Hull, who
seemed to have no thought of anything except
his immediate danger.</p>

<p>“Do you understand? Do you know who
Balling is? Your Balling? your distinguished old
gentleman? It is the man with the fair beard
who was at Schramm’s. He is your Herr Balling!
Good heavens!... We could have put our hands
on his shoulder!”</p>

<p>Hull merely gasped. Now he knew why the
sandy-bearded man had seemed familiar to him;
his were the large, fierce grey eyes!</p>

<p>“Yes,” he said, “it <i>is</i> the same man!”</p>

<p>“He has disappeared,” exclaimed Wenk; “he
no longer comes to Schramm’s. And as for you,
Herr Hull, we shall henceforth have you under
our special care, but you must endeavour to meet
our wishes and be constantly on your guard.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_46">[46]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">IV</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Hull</span> departed, and Wenk, alone with the impressions
which the evening’s experiences had left
on his mind, asked himself, “Why did the fair
unknown try to get away so secretly? Have I
made another mistake? Has my helping her in
her flight placed a weapon in the hand which
would strike at me and my work?”</p>

<p>His agitation increased, but he dismissed his
doubts of the lady. No, he felt he could rely
upon her. And now the realization of the connection
between Hull and the gambler, and all
the other stories about the latter, set his mind
working in a fresh direction, and other ideas began
to develop. He seemed to hear the beating of
the wings of some new and mighty force that
was invading his life. Conflicts were going on
in his physical nature, his phantasy, his nervous
energy and endurance. His knowledge of men
and his dominion over them were being put to
the test. Thinking fiercely, he smoked cigar after
cigar, and clouds of smoke surrounded him. It
was spring-time, storm, sunshine, and again storm,
in his blood. His muscles were engaged in an
imaginary and heroic conflict with mysterious and
mighty giants who were seeking to strangle his
fellow-men. He had seized one of them by the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_47">[47]</span>
false reddish beard which he had assumed, in
semblance of humanity.</p>

<p>From the town, lapped in slumber, it seemed
as if the spirit of the age rushed into his room—an
age fraught with dangers, demands, and
tension of all kinds. It demanded men—demanded
of all men all their ambition, self-discipline, intelligence,
selflessness ... selflessness. It should
take him! There he was, free alike from arrogance
and from indolence! Might there not be, he
asked himself in his ecstatic monologue, a new
democracy which should redeem the past? Was
that the goal towards which the present gloom was
leading mankind? Was he rising on the stormy
wave? He would no longer drift along, striving
to help his country as a mere idealist. No, he
would stand firm on his feet; struggle, contest,
but not submit! Freed from thoughts of self,
he would expend the last drop of his blood to
become what he had learned to be; he would
yield all he had to give, to the very last red drop.</p>

<p>It was not his career that was at stake, but
that which all men have in common, both in conflict
with each other and in helping one another.
It was the surge of humanity in which mortals,
for good or ill, were engulfed in a gloom which
none could dominate and subdue. In that night
of reflection the lawyer saw the criminal no longer
as a being of an inferior order. He envisaged
him as a man whose pulses raced madly along,
his senses stirred by the powers of hell; a man
whose lusts and appetites, demon-fed, should overreach
themselves and be brought to nought, and
he, Wenk, should save and deliver him. The<span class="pagenum" id="Page_48">[48]</span>
fighter should gain the ascendancy over his
adversary.</p>

<p>In imagination Wenk was now struggling with
the blond stranger, and in him he had a powerful
opponent. He suspected even more than he already
knew. If he could relieve mankind of him, he
would have accomplished something by which he
could advance further.</p>

<p>The song which Wenk’s heart had been singing
for the last two hours suddenly seemed to be
familiar to him, and in astonishment he realized
that the state to which he had now come had
been foreshadowed in his boyhood’s days, even
before his university career, his military training,
and his entry into law, when as yet no idea of
the justification of humanity had fired his blood.
Thinking over his lonely bachelor existence, without
any womanly influence, he felt a strange, sad
yearning for the father who had died long before.</p>

<p>The next day Wenk asked Hull to procure
for him a list of all the secret gambling-dens,
the addresses of which might be obtained with
the help of Cara, who was <i>au courant</i> of such
matters. He made Hull promise, however, that
he would not speak to the girl of himself in this
connection.</p>

<p>Wenk visited these places evening by evening.
He went disguised as a rich old gentleman from
the provinces. He had chosen this disguise, first
of all, because he had an excellent example of
it in an elderly uncle whom he merely had to
copy. The old gentleman gave the impression
that he was thoroughly enjoying all his experiences
of the great city.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_49">[49]</span>Wenk had some accomplices among Karstens’
acquaintances. He begged them to make it widely
known that he, the “country cousin,” was a man
of fabulous wealth, which when once settled down,
he intended to use to the full. He thought that
thus he might entice the gambler from Schramm’s
and others bent on plunder, that his wealth would
be the candle to these night moths. At times
he played carelessly for half an hour, adapting
himself to the character of the game; then he
would win considerable sums, only to lose them
again next time. With all this he never lost
sight of his own affairs or his neighbours’, and
during the game his brain was working busily
with a keenness which brought its own satisfaction.</p>

<p>One evening during the second week in which
he was pursuing this course, he came to a gaming-house
in the centre of the city which, from the
style of its habitués, who appeared more downright
than in some of the other places, seemed
to promise him something out of the common.
There he saw an old gentleman sitting at the
card-table, his attention being drawn to him on
account of his horn spectacles. These were of
unusual size. The old gentleman was addressed
as Professor. When he took his cards in his
hand, he removed his horn spectacles, exchanging
them for eyeglasses of an uncommon shape.</p>

<p>Then Wenk noticed that the spectacles now
lying on the table were not the usual type of
modern horn spectacles, but were of tortoiseshell,
very artistically designed. The old gentleman
slipped them into a large shagreen case, dotted<span class="pagenum" id="Page_50">[50]</span>
over with green points. All his movements were
very leisurely, so that Wenk had ample time for
his observations. “Those are Chinese spectacles,”
he thought to himself, recalling his own journey
to China, which he had made before the war.
The recollection surged up so powerfully that he
uttered aloud what he had really only intended
to say to himself.</p>

<p>The Professor, who sat opposite him, nodded
to him and said in a firm voice, which he had
not expected to hear from so aged a mouth, “They
are from Tsi-nan-fu!”</p>

<p>He repeated the name, stressing it and separating
the syllables, “Tsi-nan-fu.” It was as if the
name had a rhythm and recollection behind it
which affected him strongly, and which he enjoyed
in the mere repetition of the syllables. He looked
across at Wenk, as if his eyes in their large
glasses were sending him a challenge. Wenk at
once felt some strange connection with the old
Professor.</p>

<p>“Tsi-nan-fu,” said the harsh voice again, as
if with special meaning; indeed, as if he wanted
to hurl the three syllables at something, some
invisible goal behind Wenk—to reach, three times
over, an invisible point in the obscurity straight
above his head beyond the circle of electric light.</p>

<p>Wenk involuntarily raised his hand to the back
of his head and turned round. Was he seeking
the spot towards which the three syllables were
projected, and had they reached their goal? When
he looked round he observed that behind his
neighbour at the gaming-table sat the lady whose
mysterious flight from Schramm’s he had assisted.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_51">[51]</span>
It seemed as if she were regarding him mockingly,
and he did not know what course to pursue with
regard to her, but at that moment he felt that
cards were being dealt to him, and he turned
again to the table to take them up. As he did
so he began to feel sleepy, and felt dimly that
the staring eyes of the Professor were somehow
responsible for this. He forgot the beautiful unknown,
and strove to banish his lassitude, sitting
bolt upright and gazing at the green shagreen
cover of the Chinese spectacle-case. It seemed
as if the eyes of the old Professor, larger than
ever behind his glasses, were fixed vaguely upon
him, and some dim recollection of past days of
travel flitted into his mind. One morning on
his journey to China, through the porthole of
his cabin he had seen a narrow strip of coast-line
between sky and sea, and knew it for the
delta of the Yang-tse-kiang. Yes, it was the
Yang-tse-kiang.</p>

<p>Pursuing this recollection, Wenk named his
stake, won it, and left his money lying. A comfortable
sense of drowsiness pervaded him, and he
stretched himself out, enjoying it. Then he became
wide awake once more, played his game,
and continued his watch. The players were holding
the bank in turns, and it seemed to Wenk
as if he were only awaiting the moment when
the old gentleman should take it over. “Why
am I waiting for that?” he asked himself. “How
strange it is that I should be. There are feelings
that one cannot trace to their source.”</p>

<p>He finally decided that he was awaiting that
moment because the Professor with the Chinese<span class="pagenum" id="Page_52">[52]</span>
spectacles was the most interesting person present,
and that this waiting sprang from a feeling of
<i>rapport</i> and sympathy with him.</p>

<p>As the evening proceeded, this secret bond
between him and the unknown Professor grew
stronger still. “It is childish and sentimental,”
he told himself; “what is it going to lead to?”</p>

<p>Then the old gentleman took the bank, and
Wenk seemed to be released—released from a
ridiculous and unnatural tension. “Now things
will be all right,” he thought. He staked a
small sum, trying to indicate thereby that he was
no opponent of the banker, and that it was only
for form’s sake he played against him.... He
won, for he held eight points, and then he ascertained
that he had staked a much bigger note
than he had intended to. Therefore he put his
stake and his winnings together and ventured
both. He drew a king and a five. When he
held a five he never bought another card, and
this rule was so firmly established in his mind
that when asked to say Yes or No, he did not
even answer.</p>

<p>“You are taking a card?” were the words
he heard in his fit of abstraction. They were
uttered by a deep, compelling voice, and seemed
almost threatening in tone. Strangely, too, they
seemed to him to proceed from the spot behind
and above him which had been the goal of the
sounds “Tsi-nan-fu.”</p>

<p>Then he whispered hesitatingly, “Please!” and
at the same instant he seemed to dissociate himself
inwardly from this decision, but it was too
late. He had drawn a five, and that, added to<span class="pagenum" id="Page_53">[53]</span>
the cards he held, totalled more than twenty-one
and made his hand worthless.</p>

<p>The banker’s hand showed a queen and a four,
and as he had taken no other card, he had won
the round.</p>

<p>“The country cousin is losing!” said a
woman’s voice.</p>

<p>The hasty ejaculation astonished Wenk. He
turned round again, trying to penetrate the
obscurity; then he grew uneasy, and at the same
time he seemed to feel the beating of wings above
his eyes. Yes, they were wings, and he himself
was in a bird-cage. And now a seven was dealt
him. “That’s no good,” something seemed to
say to him, although it was almost certain to win.
But Wenk resisted the suggestion, and said distinctly,
“No other card for me!” It seemed
as if it were almost death to him to have to
utter these words.... He felt as if lightning-stabs
were compelling him to close his eyes. Then
in the last struggle of his will against his unnatural
weariness he saw the Professor’s hand
resting on the cards. It pressed the upper one
with a slight trembling movement, in evident desire
of giving it him, and it seemed as if a secret and
burning stream passed from this hand to him,
seeking to <i>compel</i> him to take the card, although
he had already declined it.</p>

<p>Recognizing this, he was suddenly wide awake.
It seemed as if the chains destined to fetter his
soul had fallen from before him, and he now
faced the Professor fearlessly, seized with an incomprehensible
and strangely earnest misgiving
with regard to him. He was tempted to spring<span class="pagenum" id="Page_54">[54]</span>
up and beat the beckoning fingers away from
the card.</p>

<p>“You are taking a card?” said the deep, stern
voice, as if issuing an order. It was the voice
he had already heard from behind him. Then
Wenk, in an unusually loud tone, said firmly and
indignantly, “No, I have already declined!”</p>

<p>The large eyes behind the glasses remained
fixed, gazing at him for the space of a second,
then shrank back like hounds before a more powerful
assailant. The old gentleman leaned slightly
forward, asked for brandy and water, and shortly
afterwards requested to be allowed to give up
the bank and leave the game. He felt suddenly
indisposed, he said....</p>

<p>They all busied themselves with him, crowding
round his seat, but Wenk remained in his chair.
He was struck by the connection between his
little experience and the old gentleman’s attack
of faintness. Were they indeed connected? He
felt as if he were responsible for the Professor’s
collapse. It seemed as if he had subconsciously
come into conflict with him, and that this fainting-fit
was the result of their struggle. He was
considering how he could help him. Then he felt
in his waistcoat-pocket and brought out his little
bottle of smelling-salts. He took the stopper out
and handed it across, saying, “Perhaps these salts
may be of use? I have just ...” but he was
surprised to find that the old gentleman had
already departed.</p>

<p>His earlier misgivings returned. He rose quickly
and pushed his way through the crowd. He wanted
to follow the man and bring him back. Someone<span class="pagenum" id="Page_55">[55]</span>
suddenly stopped him, saying something incomprehensible,
as if he, Wenk, were responsible
for the Professor’s condition; but Wenk’s hand
went to the revolver in his breast-pocket. Cara
Carozza advanced towards him; he pushed her
hastily aside, dragging the other with him. Then
with his disengaged hand he violently wrenched
himself free of his assailant’s grip, and hurried
to the corridor which formed the dimly lighted
side-entrance. He heard footsteps behind him
as he entered it, hastened forward, closed the door
behind him after passing through, and soon gained
the side street where the motor-cars were waiting.</p>

<p>By the light of a lantern he saw the old gentleman,
bent and bowed no longer, but with hasty
and powerful stride about to enter a car. He saw
his own chauffeur drawing up to the kerb, and
called to him in a low voice, “Follow that car!”</p>

<p>They flew after it. It was a large and powerful
car, but as it was still early in the evening,
there was a good deal of traffic, and it could
not travel at its full speed, consequently they were
close behind it. They were soon caught up in
a stream of cars and taxicabs coming from one of
the theatres, so that Wenk could follow quietly and
without exciting suspicion right to the Palace Hotel.
The Professor’s car stopped in front of it, and
before Wenk’s car came to a standstill he saw
the other enter the vestibule hastily. He gave a
fleeting glance round. Wenk hastened after him,
but happened to be caught in the stream of those
entering, who hid him from sight. He saw the
Professor rapidly open and read a telegram at
the hotel bureau, and while he was reading it<span class="pagenum" id="Page_56">[56]</span>
Wenk had time to select a favourable spot for
observing him. Thus he saw that the old gentleman,
raising his eyes from his telegram, gave a
furtive glance round, then went quickly to the
lift, opened the door and disappeared within it;
but Wenk had noticed that there was a lift
attendant sitting inside.</p>

<p>He waited till the light signalled where the
lift had stopped, and saw it was on the first floor;
then he rang for it to descend.</p>

<p>“First floor!” said he to the boy, and they
went up alone.</p>

<p>“Wasn’t it the gentleman in No. 15 who just
went up?” he asked.</p>

<p>“No, sir; it was the Dutch Professor in No. 10.”</p>

<p>“Ah, then my eyes must have deceived me,”
he said. “Thank you;” and he proceeded slowly
along the corridor. He came to No. 10, lingered
a moment there, then went on and looked backward,
hearing a door open. It might have been
No. 10. He waited, stooping down and busying
himself with his shoelace, and when he heard
the door shut again, he turned round. Then he
saw that on the mat in front of No. 10 there was
a pair of shoes.</p>

<p>He went back, an unusual idea having occurred
to him. He would knock at the door and ask
the old gentleman whether he had recovered from
his indisposition, and then take him unawares,
for he felt he had enough to go upon to arrest
him. The idea seemed to him both a bold and
promising one, but when he stood in front of
No. 10 again, he saw that the shoes outside the
door were women’s shoes, and he gave up the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_57">[57]</span>
thought. Then he went downstairs and asked
to see the hotel manager. He showed him the
necessary credentials and asked about the gentleman
in No. 10. The hotel list was brought.</p>

<p>“No. 10, you see, sir, is Professor Grote, from
The Hague.”</p>

<p>“According to your book he is staying here
alone.”</p>

<p>“That is so, your honour.”</p>

<p>“Is he always alone here, or now and then
with a female companion?”</p>

<p>“I do not allow anything of that sort, your
honour. We are very strict about our guests’
respectability.”</p>

<p>“Well, I can only say that this guest, in spite
of his size, has uncommonly small feet.”</p>

<p>“What does your honour mean by that?”</p>

<p>“He wears ladies’ shoes.”</p>

<p>“Ah now, sir, you are joking.”</p>

<p>“Well, come with me, my good fellow, and see
for yourself.”</p>

<p>They went upstairs together. In front of No. 10
they saw a pair of elegant high-heeled shoes of
the latest fashion.</p>

<p>Then Wenk cocked his revolver and went in
without the formality of knocking. He entered
the room quickly, the hotel manager following
him. The light was on, but the room was empty.
Both the windows were closed and the bathroom
adjoining had none. Wenk searched the cupboards,
bed, and drawers, but nowhere was any
clue to be found. He hurried down to the street,
but the stranger’s car had disappeared.</p>

<p>He made the manager inquire who had left<span class="pagenum" id="Page_58">[58]</span>
the hotel within the last ten minutes. “Nobody
but the secretary,” said the commissionaire. At
that moment the secretary came from behind a
partition, ready to leave the hotel. The man
looked at him in amazement.</p>

<p>“You here again! You only left a few minutes
ago.”</p>

<p>“<i>I</i> did? I was in the bureau till this very
minute,” answered the employé.</p>

<p>Then Wenk knew all he needed to know, and
the circumstance was fully explained. For the
purposes of disguise the man who had disappeared
had prepared the outfit of someone well known
in the hotel. He had put a woman’s shoes at his
door, for he conjectured, and rightly too, that
the pursuer, before he entered the room, would
go back to the bureau and inquire about the
mystery of the feminine footwear, and he had
made good use of the time this took. It was
evident to Wenk that he was dealing with a mastermind.
He was astonished at the dexterity with
which he worked. It immediately recalled the
doings of the blond stranger at Schramm’s, and
Hull’s Herr Balling.</p>

<p>On his homeward way, and after he reached
his chambers, Wenk thought over all he knew
about the bearded blond, and tried to compare
it with the impressions made on him by the Professor.
But, strangely enough, although many
details concerning the gambler at Schramm’s were
firmly and indelibly fixed in his mind, his impressions
of the Professor were wavering and indistinct,
although he had encountered him but an hour
before.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_59">[59]</span>Moreover, he grew drowsy and it seemed to
him as if he had to recover from some more
than ordinary fatigue which he had undergone
in the course of the day. He began to undress,
and a lassitude, almost like that caused by the
loss of blood, overcame him. That feeling of an
inward lightness of body which had seemed so comfortable
when he recalled it at the close of their
contest, the nervous tension after the last occurrence,
together with the sensation of faintness, now
took possession of him entirely. He yielded to
it and fell asleep before he had quite finished
undressing. In his dream it seemed as if a
mysterious and magic castle had been built up
all round him, and he knew that if he could
interpret the three syllables “Tsi-nan-fu,” or locate
that hole in the wall whither The Hague professor’s
voice projected them, he would find the key to
unlock the door of the enchanted castle.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_60">[60]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">V</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">For</span> the next few evenings Wenk did not visit
any gaming-house. As his own chauffeur, dressed
in leather cap and coat, he drove round the city,
bringing his car to a standstill before one or
other of its well-known resorts, and observing,
from the security of the driver’s seat, the people
who entered or left it.</p>

<p>On one occasion, when he was driving to the
first of these houses and proceeding slowly along
the Dienerstrasse, he was held up by a block
in the traffic. While he was waiting, he saw in
a tobacconist’s, just in front of which his course
was arrested, something which caused his pulses
to beat at double time. It was he, the sandy-bearded
man! He had his back turned and was
buying cigars, but it was certainly he! He was
making his choice slowly and carefully as if he
defied the danger of being recognized. There
was a car in front of the door. Wenk examined
it closely, but it was unfamiliar to him. He copied
its number down.</p>

<p>Once the chauffeur left it, in order to do something
to the back of the car. Wenk, who was
behind him, called to him; the man looked up,
but put his hands to his mouth as if to signify
that he was dumb.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_61">[61]</span>The man in the shop took up his parcel and
turned to the door, but the face he disclosed to
Wenk was one he had never seen before. People
pushed between him and Wenk, so that he saw
him for a moment only. Just then the block was
released, the string of cars drove on, and the
one in front of him set off at a bound, as if
hastening to get away from pursuit.</p>

<p>Wenk, however, could not shake off his conviction.
He followed. As soon as the other car
was free of the rest, it increased its speed, and
bore off to the Maximilianstrasse. Wenk was unable
to keep up with it. The street was empty
throughout its length, and when he had reached
the square at the end he saw that the car in front
was turning down Wiedenmeierstrasse. He still
followed, the distance between them always increasing,
but in the moonlight he never lost sight
of his quarry throughout the length of the street.
When he reached the Max Joseph Bridge, he saw
that the car in front was making use of the wide
square on the other bank of the Isar to make a
detour, and suddenly, with its engines throbbing,
it came back across the bridge and drove past
him. It then drove again down the Wiedenmeierstrasse,
which it had just ascended.</p>

<p>This was certainly a suspicious circumstance,
and Wenk did all he could to gain upon the other
car, and turned round while still on the bridge.
Again the other turned into the Maximilianstrasse,
and as it was now teeming with traffic, Wenk was
able to bring his own vehicle close up.</p>

<p>The strange car came to a halt outside a
theatre of varieties. Wenk sprang from his car,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_62">[62]</span>
and when the stranger left his and, turning his
back on Wenk, entered the theatre, he felt the
same overpowering conviction that it really was
the blond—it could be no other.</p>

<p>In feverish excitement Wenk pushed past the
people and got into the theatre. He saw that he
would overtake the stranger in the <i>foyer</i>, so he
waited among the rest, certain that the other would
have to pass by him.... But when he did,
Wenk saw a broad, clean-shaven man, with a
heavy mouth and large staring eyes. The face
was quite unknown to him, and coolly and indifferently
the large eyes glanced at him. Disappointed
and disgusted, Wenk passed by, intending
to go out to his waiting car.</p>

<p>A few late arrivals detained him in the proximity
of the cloakroom. It was exactly eight o’clock,
and the signal that the curtain was about to go
up was already being given. At this moment
Wenk realized what a difficulty there would be
and what excitement would be created were he
to arrest his man then and there. Unwilling to
let his quarry escape him, he turned once more,
and then saw the other disengaging himself from
a group of men who were pushing forward to
the pit, making his way quietly to the left-hand
entrance to the boxes. This led to the five
ground-floor boxes, as Wenk knew. He quickly
made up his mind and bought a seat in one of
them for himself. It was the last to be had,
and the plan showed him that each box held five
persons.</p>

<p>Going back to his car, he crept inside, and
there changed into evening dress. From the box-office<span class="pagenum" id="Page_63">[63]</span>
he telephoned his chauffeur to come for the
car, and then returned to his box.</p>

<p>It was dark when he entered it, and he tried,
but without success, to distinguish the stranger’s
features in the dim light. When the light went
up again he was equally unsuccessful in tracing
him anywhere among the twenty ladies and gentlemen
sitting in the lower boxes. It was altogether
incomprehensible. This corridor led to the five
boxes only, and they were five or six feet above
the pit. How had his quarry escaped him?</p>

<p>Now thoroughly uneasy, Wenk hastened to the
street to see whether the stranger’s car was still
there. To his relief he found it there.</p>

<p>He breathed more freely, and turned to go to
his own car and remain there until he could pursue
the other, but as he noticed the strange car again,
he saw that it had a taximeter. He had looked
at the car well before, and was certain that it
had no register. Without further reflection, Wenk
approached the chauffeur, saying, “Are you disengaged?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir,” said the chauffeur.</p>

<p>Wenk entered the car, giving his own address.
During the drive he intended to consider his next
move; then it suddenly occurred to him that the
man, who had been dumb when in the Dienerstrasse,
answered instantly when spoken to here.</p>

<p>The automobile drove on; a sweetish scent
pervaded its interior, which affected Wenk’s mucous
membranes.</p>

<p>Something <i>was</i> wrong then! “A little while ago
he was dumb, now he can talk,” reflected Wenk.
“Before it was a private car; now it is plying<span class="pagenum" id="Page_64">[64]</span>
for hire like a taxicab. What is it that smells
so strongly?” His nostrils and eyelids seemed
to be on fire.</p>

<p>In order to decide what the odour was, Wenk
drew one or two deep breaths. Then he tried to
open the window, for he found the smell unbearable.
What <i>did</i> it smell of? He raised his arm,
but he saw that it would not rise to its full extent;
it did not obey his will. At the same moment it
seemed as if a heavy block were pressing on his
eyes. Then dread seized him in a fiery grasp.
No longer capable of resistance, he began to
bellow furiously, flung himself down and kicked
with his foot at the handle of the door, but without
being able to find it.</p>

<p>For some few seconds he lay on the floor of
the car, with occasional gleams of consciousness.
Then these were finally extinguished, and complete
insensibility overtook him, while the car continued
its mad race through the streets.</p>

<p>The chauffeur drove with the unconscious form
of the drugged State Attorney throughout the
darkness to Schleissheim. There he propped him
up on a bench, and then drove back to Munich. In
the Xenienstrasse he halted before a residence
standing alone. Upon a brass plate might be
read:</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Dr. Mabuse</span>,<br/>
<span class="indentleft"><i>Neurologist.</i></span></p>

<p>A man of massive build, covered by a fur coat,
came rapidly out of the house and through the
little front garden to the car. “He is lying in<span class="pagenum" id="Page_65">[65]</span>
the Schleissheim Park,” said the chauffeur. “Here
is the notebook you wanted.”</p>

<p>“Did you remove the gas-flask from the car?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Doctor.”</p>

<p>“Drive on!”</p>

<p>But at this moment a woman, closely muffled
up, came out of the darkness and stepped towards
the car. She held on to the door, murmuring
beseechingly, “Dearest!”</p>

<p>Mabuse turned in annoyance. “What do you
want? Are you begging?”</p>

<p>The woman answered him gently and sadly.
“Yes, begging—for love!”</p>

<p>“You know my answer.”</p>

<p>“But remember the past. Why should this
be?” implored the voice.</p>

<p>Mabuse, in wrath, exclaimed, “The past is
past. Your part is to obey. My orders are
clear, and there is nothing between Yes and No.
You have heard from George what my wishes are.
Drive on, George!”</p>

<p>He was already in the car. The woman fell
back to the garden railings, covered herself up
again, and called after the retreating car, “But
if I cannot stop loving you?”</p>

<p>Then a second car pulled up close beside her.
A man sprang out and advanced towards her,
saying threateningly, “What do you want here?
Oh, oh! it’s you, Cara! Well, have you spoken
to the Doctor?”</p>

<p>She nodded despairingly.</p>

<p>“There’s nothing to be done. His will is like
a sledge-hammer, therefore don’t oppose it. So
long! I must go after him.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_66">[66]</span>And Cara Carozza gathered her disguising
garments about her and went away in grief, downcast
and heavy-hearted, to sacrifice herself for
him.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>“Where are we?” inquired Mabuse through the
speaking-tube.</p>

<p>“Past Landsberg!” answered George.</p>

<p>The plans in Mabuse’s head succeeded one
another as rapidly as the trees in a forest in
which he wandered continually further. Ever more
steps to climb, more gulfs to cross! Were they
really plans after all? Were they not dreams?
he asked himself, suddenly checking the thoughts
that were racing through his mind.</p>

<p>“Five million Swiss francs are now worth about
twenty-five million lire, i.e. five million Italian
five-lire pieces. Each of these weighs twenty
grams. Five million, will that be enough? It’s
a good idea, for the gain on every five-lire piece
which I buy at to-day’s rate with Swiss francs is
four francs; therefore the total gain will be four
million Swiss francs. Against that the costs are
thirty per cent. Good! Each one, I said, weighs
twenty grams. Now, how many kilograms are
there in five million times twenty grams? A
hundred million grams? Why cannot I think out
these simple calculations clearly? Am I afraid
of anything?”</p>

<p>Yes, there again he found himself in another
forest. “Am I afraid, really afraid? If I am,
I shall come to grief. After all, who is Hull?
Who is Wenk? What absurdity! <i>I</i> ...
afraid?”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_67">[67]</span>He collected his ideas, and sent these thoughts
packing.</p>

<p>“A hundred million grams make a hundred
thousand kilograms. According to the district he
is in, a smuggler can carry from ten to fifteen
kilos every time. How many men am I employing
in this work alone? The whole amount
must be brought from Italy to the Southern Tyrol
and thence to Switzerland within a month. The
Austrian frontiers are easier, even if I have to
employ twice the number. Spoerri reckoned the
risk to be only three per cent., according to the
police reports, as against ten per cent. by Lake
Constance or the Ticino frontier, where the
Customs officials, even in peace-time, used to
regard everybody with suspicion.”</p>

<p>Mabuse’s imagination threatened to run away
with him again. Should he not try to sleep?</p>

<p>“Where are we?” he called through the
speaking-tube.</p>

<p>“At Buchloe!” was the reply.</p>

<p>The distance from Buchloe to Röthenbach was
eighteen kilometres.</p>

<p>“That will take two hours,” he reflected;
“then we shall do it comfortably. At 2 p.m. we
must be at Schachen, and before that we meet
Spoerri at Opfenbach and Pesch on the Lindau
Hill. After that we shall be practically in
Schachen, and there will be no chance of sleep.”</p>

<p>But he could not regain control of himself.
Wenk’s attempt at pursuit oppressed him. In
the Palace Hotel he had only had ten minutes’
start of him.</p>

<p>He did not want to acknowledge it, even to<span class="pagenum" id="Page_68">[68]</span>
himself. He began to reckon that to smuggle five
million five-lire pieces from Italy and the Southern
Tyrol through Vorarlberg to Switzerland would
require two hundred and fifty people on each
frontier. That was five hundred men for the
smuggling alone. If he reckoned the buyers and
the Bolzano collectors as well, it was really seven
hundred. With their families he might consider
that he was keeping, roughly, about four thousand
people. That was a small township. A little
town lay in his grasp, pledged to evil purposes,
working in dark nights, stealing along mysterious
byways, avoiding the revolvers of Customs officials,
working stealthily, steadily, at his will. They
had no thought either, but of him, the owner of
the money, the employer and dictator, the possessor
of all power and force. They ventured their lives
for him, but he had never seen one of them.
How would it be if he were to see and converse
with them, appearing abruptly before them when
they were in the midst of their enterprise? They
would imagine themselves to be caught, until they
should have realized that it was he, their master
and employer, who stood amongst them.</p>

<p>Four thousand people; it was a whole district.
But in Citopomar it would be something very
different when he traversed the virgin forests and
had the Botocudos and all the other tribes directly
under his thumb, and had left this insignificant
beggarly little continent behind him! There his
word alone would be law. There, in Citopomar,
the dream of his boyhood would be fulfilled—a
dream which had already begun to be realized
on that large and desolate island which lay cradled<span class="pagenum" id="Page_69">[69]</span>
in the ocean yonder. There he had owned men;
there wild Nature was his alone; as a conqueror
he had sailed the waters; his blood and sinews
governed men; his will was imposed on Nature;
the palms of his planting yielded him a luxuriant
growth of wealth—sheer gold. He could despise
it because he did not need it, for there he was
free, free as a king, a deity!...</p>

<p>But the war had driven him out of his
Paradise and sent him back to the despised
continent of Europe. He could not endure life
in these European countries. He felt as if he
were confined in a pasture, eating grass like dumb,
senseless cattle ate their predestined, accustomed
grass. No, he could not live thus! Therefore
by undermining State organization he was preparing
a State for himself, with laws which he
alone made, with powers vested in himself over
the souls and bodies of men. By means of his
accomplices he was collecting the money wherewith
to establish his empire in the primeval forests
of Brazil, the Empire of Citopomar.</p>

<p>He was self-sufficing. What were men to him?
He scattered them at will. Yonder, however, in
the future, in Citopomar, there would be none who
<i>could</i> oppose him.</p>

<p>By degrees, as these thoughts ran away with
him, Mabuse fell asleep, his limbs reclining on
the cushions and his phantasies soaring above all
material things. For two long hours he slept,
sunk in the darkness of his dreams.</p>

<p>Then it seemed as if a little hammer were
striking his skull, always on the same spot. It
was annoying, and it was unheard of. He had<span class="pagenum" id="Page_70">[70]</span>
only two hours between Buchloe and Röthenbach
in which to sleep. Who had dared to strike his
head with this hammer?</p>

<p>All at once he was wide awake. The hammer
was the whistle of the speaking-tube.</p>

<p>“Well?” called out Mabuse.</p>

<p>“There is a car behind us.”</p>

<p>“What are its marks?”</p>

<p>“There is a grey patch on the right lamp.”</p>

<p>“What is the time?”</p>

<p>“Half-past one.”</p>

<p>“And where are we?”</p>

<p>“Two kilometres from Röthenbach.”</p>

<p>“Pull up! It is Spoerri.”</p>

<p>The car stopped, and immediately its lights
went out, and so did those of the car which
followed. Then it drove close up and stopped.
There was a cough heard.</p>

<p>“Come here!” said Mabuse.</p>

<p>Someone came out of the darkness. Mabuse
had drawn the revolver from his coat-pocket. The
car-driver turned on a small electric lamp, and its
gleam disclosed a man wrapped in a large cloak.</p>

<p>“Spoerri?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Doctor.”</p>

<p>The pistol was returned to its place.</p>

<p>“Spoerri, wait here a quarter of an hour, or
else drive to Schachen by another route. You
must arrive shortly after me, between half-past
one and two o’clock. I have decided on some
great changes that I want to tell you of before we
go to Switzerland. Anything else?”</p>

<p>“Everything is in order. I have another
hundred kilos of cerium in the car.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_71">[71]</span>“Good. Between half-past one and two
o’clock!”</p>

<p>They drove on. As their road approached the
Austrian frontier, which was patrolled by officials,
their lights were extinguished for a while, but in
Schlachters they shone out again, and the village
was soon left behind them.</p>

<p>Half-way to Lindau, where forest and hill meet,
they stopped again.</p>

<p>“Anybody there?”</p>

<p>“No, Doctor.”</p>

<p>“Not Pesch?”</p>

<p>“I don’t see anybody.”</p>

<p>Mabuse quitted the car impatiently.</p>

<p>“I will punish him for this. I <i>will</i> have my
people punctual!”</p>

<p>He waited on, and the minutes crept by.
Mabuse slapped his thigh angrily. To keep him
waiting! That a smuggler should dare to do
such a thing! He was consumed with impatience,
and felt as if his dignity were impeached. That
a smuggler should keep him, the master, waiting!</p>

<p>Five minutes later a car, with faint lights,
issued from the junction road and stopped on
the highway.</p>

<p>“Pesch!” exclaimed Mabuse.</p>

<p>A man turned from the open car.</p>

<p>“Yes, Doctor, here I am. It is Pesch.”</p>

<p>“It is 1.45 a.m., and you were due at 1.35.”</p>

<p>“Oh, a matter of ten minutes doesn’t count. <i>I’ve</i>
had to wait often enough!” answered the voice
in the darkness in a defiant tone.</p>

<p>“If I had a horsewhip here I’d cudgel you
soundly. Ten minutes mean fifteen kilometres<span class="pagenum" id="Page_72">[72]</span>
advance upon a pursuer, you fool! You are
earning two thousand marks from me to-night.”</p>

<p>The other answered boldly, “And with my
help <i>you</i> are earning twenty thousand!”</p>

<p>“Five hundred thousand more likely, you blockhead,”
said Mabuse; “but that’s nothing to do
with you. The only question here is who is master
and who servant.”</p>

<p>“You are not my master,” said the other.</p>

<p>“I am not? ... you say so, do you?” he
thundered. “Very well, you can get along home.
I don’t want you any more—never any more!”</p>

<p>He turned to his car and got in; then said
hastily in a threatening tone, “If you feel inclined
to send any anonymous information to the
authorities, you’ll remember that there is a fir-tree
growing in the wood, and there’s room for
you to hang there like your colleague Haim.
Drive on, George!”</p>

<p>The car started off again.</p>

<p>In the neighbourhood of Schachen, where
stately houses with upper stories made cars appear
less striking, they found a park gate open, and
without any difficulty George found his way along
the dark drive leading to the villa. The lights
were extinguished.</p>

<p>While Mabuse and George were still standing
on the doorstep Spoerri arrived.</p>

<p>When Mabuse opened the door and turned on
the light, he saw that Spoerri was dressed as a
monk.</p>

<p>“It is a mere accident,” said Spoerri. “I
had to go to Switzerland in a hurry, and down
there in the Rhine valley a cowl is more useful<span class="pagenum" id="Page_73">[73]</span>
than even a genuine frontier pass. The last pass
I had is in St. Gallen, and you know that I had
to leave there hastily. But I had left the list of
securities with Schaffer, and he brought them to
me at Altstetten to-day. It is not safe to send
such things by post nowadays.”</p>

<p>When he said this they were sitting in a large,
well-furnished dining-room. George served the
supper, brought ready prepared from Munich, and
warmed up on the electric stove. Still eating,
Mabuse said:</p>

<p>“We will liquidate on the lake itself, and thus
we shall gain five points more than on land,
according to the lists. I have bought five million
Italian five-lire pieces. They are coming to the
Southern Tyrol, and must be taken to Switzerland
by way of the Vorarlberg. You must look after
that, Spoerri. The Italian agent is Dalbelli, in
Meran. You must go there to-morrow. I give
you a month to do it in, and then we shall
start a fresh district. Switzerland is now strongly
against the importation of silver, and so there
is less competition. We shall get enough of the
five-lire pieces in Italy, and I have tried to do it
with French silver too, but since the Treaty of
Versailles there are so many fresh business combines
in France, and they give nobody anything
because the majority of them have not been in
trade before. Have you not noticed that?”</p>

<p>Spoerri nodded, making some inward calculation.</p>

<p>“Stop your calculations till I have done talking,”
said Mabuse sharply, and Spoerri looked up in
confusion.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_74">[74]</span>Mabuse continued: “My confidential agent in
the Government has informed me that meat-control
will be abolished in Bavaria next month, but the
matter will be kept dark. The difference in the
prices prevailing in Bavaria and in Würtemberg
is an enormous one, and for the first few weeks
of decontrol it will still be very considerable. It
would be a good thing to begin buying up now,
however, and you can say that I am prepared
to lay out ten million marks. Buy as much as
you can get hold of; haste is wisdom in this
respect. Inquire of Meggers in Stuttgart about
the sales, and see that we have enough people for
the transport. Everything must be completed within
three days of giving the orders. We shall want
from a thousand to twelve hundred head of cattle,
and look out for beasts of good quality. No
sheep or pigs—the risk is too great. Reckon
it up for yourself before you do anything further.
We get thirty per cent. on our purchase, and therefore
we can allow ten per cent. on expenses.
You must reckon more correctly than you did
about the salvarsan.”</p>

<p>“That time I hadn’t calculated....”</p>

<p>“Exactly, you hadn’t calculated correctly.
Pesch is withdrawing; let him be closely watched
by the Removal Committee, for he is impulsive,
and if he plays the slightest trick he can be
strung up beside Haim. By the way, they haven’t
found <i>him</i> yet.... How much did you pay for
the cerium?”</p>

<p>“It was dearer than....”</p>

<p>“Everything always is dearer than ... the
Poles or the Bolsheviks can get it. How much?”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_75">[75]</span>“Fifty marks.”</p>

<p>“Fifty Swiss francs then. They must have it,
so don’t yield a stiver!”</p>

<p>He whistled into the speaking-tube under the
table.</p>

<p>“George there?” he called out. “Everything
in order?... Good. The <i>Rhine</i> is waiting,
Spoerri. George, you are to be pilot; don’t forget
the securities. That’s all for the present”; and
turning again to Spoerri, “You’ll be in no danger
in going to Zürich, Spoerri, will you?”</p>

<p>“I am all right as soon as I’ve passed the
Customs, and then I go on as a priest.”</p>

<p>“If you travel by the <i>Rhine</i>, you’ll avoid the
Customs; you can take charge of the securities
and put them in the bank, to the account of
Salbaz de Marte, mining engineer. Here is the
list: a million in German Luxemburg stock, two
million German Colonial Loan, five hundred
thousand-mark notes. These are to be changed
at once into milreis; that gives a better exchange
than either dollars or Swiss francs. Inform
Dr. Ebenhügel that fresh securities have been
deposited, and that I want him to make use of the
first favourable opportunity and sell for milreis....
There is one rather difficult matter to settle:
the disposal of the people who have been working
for me in Constance. If they are
unemployed....”</p>

<p>“Many don’t want to work any longer, in any
case,” said Spoerri.</p>

<p>“I know. Those are the folks who have all they
want; there’s nothing to fear from <i>them</i>. With
my help they have got their own houses and<span class="pagenum" id="Page_76">[76]</span>
are free of debt. But sometimes I have been
obliged to take any workers I could get, and
those who don’t own their houses should be
carefully watched. The powder magazine is at
Constance, for the young fellows live there, and
if we suddenly withdraw these high wages from
them, there is nothing for them to do but steal,
and in a week’s time they’ll find themselves in
prison and will be blabbing everything in their
rage. Talk to George about this, and see what
is to be done. He’s going there to-morrow. The
safest thing would be to pack them off into the
Foreign Legion. Go and see Magnard as soon
as you have finished up in Zürich and Meran.
Don’t forget to claim the commission for them.
Give it to George, who can divide it among those
concerned.... Authorize Böhm to sell the three
motor-boats that we have on the lake besides
the <i>Rhine</i>. <i>That</i> always bears the ensign of the
Royal Würtemberg Yacht Club and therefore is
unnoticed. Keep the <i>Rhine</i> in this neighbourhood
for any emergency. The boat can do sixty kilometres
if it is well handled. Let us go.”</p>

<p>George was waiting outside. The three men felt
their way through the darkness to the landing-stage,
where they could hear the boat’s engines throbbing.</p>

<p>“You have followed out my orders and there’s
nothing on board?” said Mabuse.</p>

<p>“Nothing but the cerium.”</p>

<p>“Take it out then. I am not a dealer in
scrap-iron!”</p>

<p>George hastened forward. Three men were busy
in the gloom. Then Mabuse and Spoerri went
on board and the boat started, going cautiously<span class="pagenum" id="Page_77">[77]</span>
through the night. The engine scarcely throbbed.
There was a slight vibration in the cabin where
Mabuse sat, wrapped in his fur coat; then he
went to the deck aft, and impatiently forward
to the engine. After they had travelled for
a while, he listened intently. It seemed to him as
if through the sounds made by his own boat a
noise reached his ears.</p>

<p>“Stop!” he cried suddenly.</p>

<p>George stopped the engine, and the sounds outside
ceased. They started again, and immediately
the sounds on the water, now on the right and
again on the left, were heard once more. Mabuse
went on the fore-deck, where the noise of the
engine was not so distinct. From there he could
hear them quite distinctly.</p>

<p>“We are pursued, or at any rate under
surveillance,” he thought. “Can it be that
lawyer-detective Wenk?” Calmly, yet defiantly,
he got his pistols ready. In the darkness he
tried to discern what flag the <i>Rhine</i> was carrying,
but it was impossible to find out.</p>

<p>“Spoerri,” he called out softly, and Spoerri
came out of the cabin. “What are we travelling
as? Don’t you hear that we are being followed?”</p>

<p>“No, no,” said Spoerri, “we are a Swiss patrol-boat
to-night. I heard that the Germans were
about, so I ordered the three other boats to act as
convoy. One is travelling behind us, the others
on each side. Nobody could reach us; we are
already in Swiss waters.”</p>

<p>“How much a year do you earn in my service,
that makes you take such care of me?” said
Mabuse spitefully.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_78">[78]</span>“Quite enough,” answered Spoerri; “but that
is not why I do it.”</p>

<p>“Why then? Are you enamoured of my person,
or is it merely the Christian charity that it suits
you Swiss folk to assume since the war?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Spoerri simply.</p>

<p>“I have three and a half millions here in my
dispatch-case. If you dared to, you would strangle
me, but you don’t dare, and that is all there is
about it. That is your pure humanity and love.
During the last year you have had somewhere
about eighty-five thousand, six hundred and
seventy-seven marks or more from me.... Is
that enough to stifle the desire to murder a man?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Spoerri once more.</p>

<p>“Then you are a slave—my slave. Do you
hear me? You are my slave.”</p>

<p>“I hear you.”</p>

<p>“Shall I slap your face? No; I won’t touch
your slave-skin with my own. I just spit in the
air.”</p>

<p>“Into the sea. You won’t pick a quarrel with
anybody. There is no point of honour on the
Lake of Constance.”</p>

<p>“Point of honour is an expression that doesn’t
exist. A point is no larger than a squashed fly,
and that’s the extent of a man’s honour—yours too,
eh? You have some honour, even if the Lake of
Constance has not?”</p>

<p>“I have never measured it.”</p>

<p>“Speak sense when you talk to me. I won’t
stand your tomfoolery.”</p>

<p>“We are getting close to the shore.”</p>

<p>“Are you shirking, fellow?”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_79">[79]</span>“No.”</p>

<p>“You dog!” said Mabuse in a stifled voice,
in growing wrath. “I feel hatred tingling in
my finger-tips. I shall grasp you by the throat,
you cur, you cowardly cur, and I shall annihilate
you just as the electric current in the American
death-chair does, you miserable wretch!”</p>

<p>At this moment the engine stopped. For some
time the sounds of the boats behind them had
ceased.</p>

<p>“Why have we stopped?” asked Mabuse
angrily. “I gave no orders.”</p>

<p>“There is no signal from the shore.”</p>

<p>Then Mabuse came to himself again. He
stood up, gnashing his teeth, and asked:</p>

<p>“What is the matter?”</p>

<p>“We must wait. We can always rely on Solly.
There is something wrong.”</p>

<p>“Let us wait! Have you weapons ready?”</p>

<p>“Yes, but if we don’t get the signal, we’d
better get into the skiff. Then we can row back
to the other boats.”</p>

<p>Behind Romanshorn a searchlight began to play,
throwing a beam of light into the sky. It moved
lower and peered about through the darkness,
probing closely and lingering in places, then was
directed towards the waters in the middle of the
lake. It rose in the sky once more and then
fell pitilessly on the very spot where Mabuse’s
boat was lying. His knees trembled under the
tension.</p>

<p>Suddenly, however, the shaft of light was
fixed on a house standing out prominently in
Romanshorn, just where the new church stood on<span class="pagenum" id="Page_80">[80]</span>
a hill, and those in the boat perceived that the
other craft must be far beyond on the other side
of the point, and did not signify any danger.
Their boat remained in darkness. In the railway-station
on the shore lamps hung here and there
at some distance from each other, and their
reflections gleamed fitfully on the black waters.
Then Mabuse said sternly:</p>

<p>“No, we’ll stay here! Tell George to get the
pneumatic gun fastened to the engine.”</p>

<p>Spoerri sprang to do his bidding.</p>

<p>Under the cushions there was a poison-gas
installation. Mabuse opened the nozzle. The wind
was from the south-west and therefore favourable
to his purpose. He prepared masks for himself
and his companions and tried their fastenings.</p>

<p>Then he saw on shore a light which shone out
brightly and was at once extinguished, then came
again and flickered and was still. The engine
started again, and the boat was soon in the
channel, gliding under the trees, where it finally
came to a standstill. The engine was silent, and
a man ashore threw out a cable. Then Mabuse
heard someone say, “Dr. Ebenhügel.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” he ordered, “let him come on board.”</p>

<p>A dim form stepped across the gangway.</p>

<p>“It is I, Ebenhügel, Doctor. I have just come
from Zürich. It is on account of my car that
Solly did not give the signal punctually. The
Customs authorities are on the watch every night
with their cars now. Did you get my wire? There
is something wrong, for the clerk has sent a warning.
He could not tell us what was up, but
from some reply to one of his superiors he<span class="pagenum" id="Page_81">[81]</span>
gathered that it came to the Consulate headquarters
in Zürich from the Munich Criminal
Investigation Department.”</p>

<p>“So,” said Mabuse, closing his jaws firmly,
“my lord Wenk is on the track, is he? Just you
wait a while, my fine official!” Then, turning
to Ebenhügel, he continued, “I am constantly
in danger, but I’ve never come to grief yet.”</p>

<p>“I meant to say that this danger can only be
averted in Munich. If anything goes wrong, they
must not be able to put the responsibility on us
here in Zürich.”</p>

<p>Mabuse answered roughly, “What do you mean
by that?”</p>

<p>“This affair is of great importance for several
people.”</p>

<p>“For whom then?”</p>

<p>“For myself, for example!”</p>

<p>Mabuse waved his hand with a threatening
gesture of dismissal, while the other stood
breathless.</p>

<p>“<i>I</i> have not been drinking,” said Mabuse.
“How came you to alter my plans for such a
trifle?”</p>

<p>“I thought it was necessary to warn you. The
post is being watched, and people are not reliable.”</p>

<p>“Who is to convince me that <i>you</i> are reliable?
You are one of the people too.”</p>

<p>“Our common interests should convince you,
Doctor. I merely meant to tell you that it is from
Munich that the danger threatens. You would
be safe in Switzerland. You have accumulated
wealth which allows you to live wherever you like.
Stay here; you will be safe among us.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_82">[82]</span>“A lot <i>you</i> know about that! Your business
is to look after my investments, nothing else. You
are but my manager. Enough on that head. Is
there anything else to tell me?”</p>

<p>The lawyer described his latest financial operations
to Mabuse, who took down the descriptions
furnished him. Then he walked backwards and
forwards alone on the foreshore for five minutes,
to ease himself after his long sitting.</p>

<p>“Is Spoerri still there?” he asked. “Spoerri,
you need not go to Zürich. Ebenhügel will take
the portfolio with him. We will go back to
Schachen together.”</p>

<p>Upon the return journey Mabuse could not
remain still in one place. He was constantly
backwards and forwards on the small deck. The
three convoys were again throbbing in their
neighbourhood, their sounds drowned in the ghostly
darkness. Suddenly Mabuse called through the
speaking-tube to George, demanding brandy.
Spoerri heard the order and shrank in terror.</p>

<p>In the half-hour which the passage took, Mabuse
drank the bottle empty. He was drunk when
they landed, and he staggered through the darkness
towards the house in front of them, having
issued orders that they were not to follow for
five minutes.</p>

<p>“We want more drink,” said he, when they were
in the dining-room. “George, bring drinks!”</p>

<p>George shuddered, for he knew that the more
the doctor drank, the more violent and unreasonable
he became. Spoerri himself was always
obliged to drink till he lost his senses. They
drank champagne and brandy mixed in equal parts.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_83">[83]</span>“This is liquid gold,” stuttered Mabuse thickly.
“Here, George, bring bigger glasses! Let’s have
the goblets. Spoerri, take a draught. You fool
of a courier, drink; drink it down, you dog.
Down with it into your currish throat! Now then,
another! Drink till you can’t hold any more in
that carcass of yours. I love to see you drink
till you’re sick!”</p>

<p>Spoerri drank until everything swam round him
and he lapsed into unconsciousness.</p>

<p>“And you, my lord Wenk! A State
Attorney in Munich! Your notebook! <i>Your</i>
orders to the Criminal Investigation Department,
forsooth! Just wait a moment, my fine gentleman!
We’ll begin with Herr Hull, for he was the
first.... (Drink, Spoerri, can’t you, you miserable
country bumpkin, drink; drink as I do!)
Let me see—Hull, yes, Edgar Hull, 34, Hubertusstrasse.
Away with him, his turn first. George
will look after it, and you can help him. The
Carozza girl can contrive it. Find your accomplices.
Write it down, it is the order of the
... Prince. (Drink it down, now!) Of the
Prince, have you written that? Which prince,
do you say? The Prince, the Emperor of
Citopomar, in Southern Brazil. A word from his
mouth and a thousand women lie bathed in their
blood, five hundred men are reduced to impotence.
One single word and a whole edifice totters! Don’t
simper, you fool, or I’ll dash your brains out
with this goblet!”</p>

<p>He flung the vessel down, shattering it in pieces,
and with the fragments he threatened Spoerri.</p>

<p>“I ... I am writing it,” stammered Spoerri.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_84">[84]</span>“A thousand women and five hundred men,”
shouted Mabuse.</p>

<p>“Doctor,” said Spoerri hesitatingly, struggling
with the intoxication overcoming his senses, “I
did not hear; I do not know this Hull. What
am <i>I</i> to do with him? 34, Hubertusstrasse....
Do you really mean <i>me</i>, Doctor?”</p>

<p>Then Mabuse all at once stood upright,
intoxicated as he was. “Yes, you!” he thundered,
and then gave Spoerri a heavy blow with
his fist, full on his forehead, knocking him
senseless to the floor. “I am going to bed,
George,” he shouted, overcome with rage. He left
Spoerri lying where he was, and went out.</p>

<p>When he came into the dining-room again next
morning, Spoerri was sitting there. Mabuse had
breakfasted in bed.</p>

<p>“Show me your notes!” he ordered in a harsh
voice. He ran through them quickly, found
Hull’s address traced in drunken characters, and
returned the book to Spoerri. “That’s all right,”
said he, and Spoerri fawned upon him like a cur
watching to avoid a kick.</p>

<p>That attitude of his did Mabuse good; it
soothed and reconciled him, and he became
talkative. Spoerri was quietly delighted to find
the master friendly towards him, to know that the
dread will of this imperious man inclined him
to be amiable, as if recognizing his devotion.</p>

<p>“Spoerri,” said the Doctor, “I shall go to
Constance with you. We mustn’t let those young
men do anything stupid!”</p>

<p>Spoerri brightened up. “Oh, when they once
see you, Doctor, there’ll be no trouble at all.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_85">[85]</span>The two men remained all day long at the
villa. Mabuse drank, but no longer compelled
Spoerri to do so. By midday he was already
intoxicated. Spoerri, tired out by the carousal
of the previous night, watched over Mabuse
devotedly. He tried many simple devices
to persuade him to stop drinking, but Mabuse
soon saw through them, and ordered full bottles
to be brought and no tricks to be played. Alcohol
was a necessity to him; it inflamed his wild
and evil spirit, and in the phantasies of intoxication
he found all his great ideas. There was
no thwarting of his will from without, and when
drunk he felt himself enclosed as in a castle of
the <i>Arabian Nights</i>. Nobody could understand
that to him alcohol was the bringer of magic,
the stream which intensified life and gave him
creative power. He bathed in it as he might
do in the love of some fair woman, yielding
himself to it wholly, bridging chasms, attempting
new feats, working unrestrainedly and overcoming
all obstacles.... He became a law unto himself,
a world of which he was the sun.</p>

<p>“Spoerri, how do you like Europe?” he
stuttered.</p>

<p>“Oh, very much, Doctor,” answered Spoerri
unreflectingly.</p>

<p>Then Mabuse broke out vehemently, “You shall
<i>not</i> go to Citopomar, to my Empire! Europe is
a filthy, lousy country, fit for none but grubs and
earthworms. It is the home of parasites, of all
creepy, crawly creatures, but when I am in
Citopomar—<span class="smcap">Citopomar</span> ... Spoerri, I shan’t
take you with me. I am going to sleep now,
and will see you later.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_86">[86]</span>He staggered out, and lying in his bedroom
on his bed, fully dressed, he felt for a few moments
as if he were himself the universe, beyond and
above all bounds and limits, the power of his
will surging over him as a stream of molten lava,
bearing him with it towards the day when, in
his distant kingdom, his power would be supreme
over man and beast, and all Nature be subjugated
to his impulses.</p>

<p>In the evening, when the twilight was descending,
they drove to Constance. Mabuse was sober,
silent and morose. His imagination was already
busy and his nerves reacting to his stern resolves,
as he thought of the crowds of young men in the
town, which seemed but a mere speck on his
horizon—men who had been working for him since
the Armistice. From this very town he himself
had made a new start when the war had driven
him from his own vast plantations in the Solomon
Isles back into the European vortex, and he could
find nothing better to do than work for medical
examinations and exchange his career in the Pacific
for that of a doctor in a town of Southern
Germany.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_87">[87]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">VI</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Wenk</span> was awakened by a feeling of chilliness,
which set him shivering. He pulled his cloak
round him, under the impression that the coverlet
had slipped off his bed, but he soon became aware
of his error. He sat up, feeling giddy and at first
unable to recall anything. He came slowly to
himself and then he perceived where he was and
saw the castle buildings gleaming through the
darkness.</p>

<p>He rose hastily and moved away, but he was
still dazed, and had to jump about to get any
warmth into his body. What could the time be?
He felt for his watch, but it was not there, and
then he went hastily through his pockets. His
purse was missing; so, too, were his pocket-book
and his official notebook. He had fallen into
the hands of thieves. The strange thing was how
it could have happened that he had escaped with
his life?</p>

<p>Then sudden dread seized upon him. He held
his head in his hands, setting his jaws firmly,
striving to subdue his feeling of despair. His
notebook was missing, and in this were to be
found addresses, reports, information, data, plans
of all kinds.... The very first thing he recalled
about it was the opening page, on which the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_88">[88]</span>
Hull affair was fully set forth.... Wenk now
hurried straight forward. If only he could
recover his notebook! He rushed on till he was
out of breath, then stopped and asked himself,
“What shall I do? Go to the nearest railway-station?
But what is the time? It may be one
o’clock, it may be five. How am I to tell? And
when would the first train start? It might mean
waiting in front of a closed railway-station for
four, even five hours!” Then he reflected that
if he were to wake anybody in the castle he would
have to submit to questioning. No; that would
do no good. Should he make a fuss about it?
It was clear that the chauffeur had acted in
obedience to the blond stranger’s orders. Had
the latter really penetrated his disguise and laid
his plans so cautiously and cleverly beforehand,
or was it the usual thing that anyone who appeared
in any way suspicious should at once be put to
the test in this way? Could it be merely theft,
and the book have been taken from him by
accident? He realized that when he seated himself
on the cushions he must have set the gas-current
free, for there was no gas in the car when he
got in. That had been arranged, then. No, it
wasn’t that way either. It was something both
simpler and safer. The driver could open the
gas valve from his seat. Of course that was the
way of it.</p>

<p>Thinking thus, Wenk reached the highroad, only
half-conscious of his resolve to proceed to Munich
on foot. He went as fast as he could, but every
now and then he had to stop and wait till a
feeling of giddiness had passed. That must<span class="pagenum" id="Page_89">[89]</span>
be the effect of the gas. What sort of gas
could it be that operated so rapidly and yet did
so little harm? His foes might just as easily
have used a deadly gas, then they would have
got rid of him altogether. Why did they use a
stupefying gas merely? Was it meant for a warning
to him?</p>

<p>Now, at any rate, his notebook was in their
hands, and perhaps they wanted nothing more of
him than that. It was but an attack on his little
notebook. Whose names were to be found there?
Karstens’, for one ... and an account of all
the occurrences in the gaming-houses with the
sandy-bearded man and the old Professor, and
in the Palace Hotel likewise. All the places where
gambling was carried on were noted there too.
It was clearly only his notebook that they wanted,
and that they had succeeded in getting, but the
book he had lost had meant a good deal to him.</p>

<p>He went faster and faster by the sleeping
houses, past the peaceful suburbs and into the
quiet approaches of the town. The byways, in
which traces of snow still lay, seemed like
dragons creeping through the night, bent on
spying in the ghostly light on those who went by,
and Wenk shuddered at the thought. But when
a tram-car drew near he felt more at ease. He
soon recognized where he was and hastened to
his own chambers. He was thoroughly exhausted
when he reached home, threw himself fully dressed
upon his bed and became unconscious once more,
not awakening until the evening.</p>

<p>The first idea which occurred to him then was
that henceforth his life was at stake. He accepted<span class="pagenum" id="Page_90">[90]</span>
it calmly, for since he was combating evil, it was
natural that it should be so. The conflict would
be played out on the borderland between existence
and annihilation, and for one moment he wondered
whether it were worth while to go on. But only
for a moment. He immediately told himself that
there could be no question of hesitation here. Such
men are like beasts escaped from a menagerie,
and it was his task, his duty, the justification for
his existence, to help to make them powerless for
evil. There must be no fear of men, no fear of
the body any more than he had had of the soul,
since his mind had once succeeded in grasping
the crisis through which his country was passing.
Since he too had been a witness of its genesis,
he must help to overcome its effects.</p>

<p>Yet one more thought. Was he a match for
his opponent? Must he not fortify himself if he
were henceforward to pit his life and strength in
such a struggle? His adversary seemed to have
the advantage of him, for he worked in the dark.
Were his own hands strong enough to seize and
hold the evil powers advancing upon him and to
crush them? Had he the strength to fight the
age, for his opponent was more than a cheat,
a criminal—he was the whole spirit of the age,
a spirit torn through the catastrophe of the war
from the hellish depths where it was created, to
fall upon the world and the homes of men. He
realized that against such an opponent he must
spread his nets more widely if he hoped to ensnare
him. He must have an organization equal to the
criminal’s own. He must not, as hitherto, consider
it sufficient to rely on his confederates, those<span class="pagenum" id="Page_91">[91]</span>
who were entirely of one mind with himself. He
must seek his helpers in the enemy’s camp.</p>

<p>At once he thought of the lady whose strange
and questionable escape he had assisted. He
drove quickly to Schramm’s. Yes, there she was,
but, as usual, a spectator merely. He sat down
beside her.</p>

<p>“You are not playing, sir?” said she.</p>

<p>“No, your example has made watching more
interesting than playing to me.”</p>

<p>“Watching,” laughed the lady lightly, “when
carried on by a high legal official is not good ...
for the players!”</p>

<p>Wenk had a slight suspicion that this was said
with a double meaning, but whether mockingly
or warningly he could not decide; in any case,
it was said to serve the purpose of some other, who
possibly was sitting there at play. Perhaps they
worked secretly in partnership.</p>

<p>He observed her closely, but she sat quietly
idle. Her bright eyes roved in all directions.
He said to her, feeling his way:</p>

<p>“You have yourself seen a high legal official
caught in the toils of the gaming-devil. His
jurisdiction is troublesome to the other player!”</p>

<p>He said “the <i>other</i>,” and waited to see whether
she would start, or twitch nervously, or give the
player some sign or other. But she did none
of these things, merely remained still and accepted
his words with a friendly smile.</p>

<p>“She is a beautiful woman,” he thought, “and
there is some secret reserve strength in her.
Men play for money, but it would be more worthy of
their manhood to play for such a woman as this.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_92">[92]</span>After a few moments she leaned towards him,
saying lightly and with a playful impressiveness:</p>

<p>“I was present when Basch lost so heavily!”</p>

<p>“I know you were,” said Wenk, astonished and
inquiringly.</p>

<p>“And you were playing then, too.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I was playing. I have just confessed it!”</p>

<p>“Ah, but I mean you were really playing <i>then</i>!
The first evening, when you came with Hull, you
took part in the game, but you were not really
playing. And the evening when the old Professor
was there—well, I don’t quite know, there was some
sort of atmospheric disturbance ... wasn’t there
now?” she said, turning to him with a melting
and wholly feminine gesture of friendliness.</p>

<p>Wenk was taken aback. He replied:</p>

<p>“That evening when the old Professor was
there? What old Professor?”</p>

<p>“The evening you came as a country cousin,”
she answered roguishly.</p>

<p>At last Wenk comprehended that she had
recognized him, and his face showed his disappointment,
but she begged him not to mind her having
found him out.</p>

<p>“You were well disguised,” she said, “but I
could not believe that here in Munich there would
be two such quaint little monkeys on a cherry-tree,
conjured so cleverly by a Chinese jewel-cutter
out of an amethyst. When I first saw
the ring, flanked on each side by stupid diamonds
on stupid fingers, I noticed it with pleasure.”</p>

<p>Wenk looked at her, awaiting something more.
Who could she be?</p>

<p>“At any rate, it struck me as curious that there<span class="pagenum" id="Page_93">[93]</span>
could be two men, even in such circles as ours”—here
she glanced round the table—“who had
some amount of taste....”</p>

<p>“Your sarcasm,” said Wenk, entering into her
vein, “does not require either Yes or No, for the
fact that you noticed my ring and so correctly
guessed its origin proves that you belong to a
very different circle from the one you find yourself
in here.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I was a stewardess on a steamer bound
for Asiatic ports, but the war has taken both our
ships and our calling from us!”</p>

<p>“May I then hazard the suggestion that you
have withdrawn from your former calling at some
advantage to yourself?”</p>

<p>“Oh, I am not stupid!” she smiled back.</p>

<p>“There is nothing which it is more unnecessary
to assure me of, Countess.”</p>

<p>There was a momentary flutter in the beautiful
woman’s eye, and an imperceptible something
within her seemed to come to a standstill. Had
he known who she was and wanted to play with
her a little, and would he now blazon abroad the
fact that she frequented such places secretly?</p>

<p>Wenk laughed aloud.</p>

<p>“Or can it be that the coroneted handkerchief
comes from the trunk of some countess travelling
to Asiatic ports, as Sherlock Holmes would argue?
No, dear lady, we are quits. We shall both
comport ourselves more circumspectly in future
when we are among our fellow-mortals. I shall
put a stupid diamond on my finger, and you will
use a monogram without a coronet on your
handkerchiefs, Countess....”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_94">[94]</span>“Hush!” she said, in agitation.</p>

<p>“But even such precautions would serve no
turn!”</p>

<p>“I do not understand you.”</p>

<p>“You force me to pay you compliments. I am
seeking vainly for a suitable way of expressing
myself so that I may convey to you my conviction
that the ‘countess’ in you cannot anyhow be
suppressed.”</p>

<p>“He will be asking me to sup with him
directly,” she said to herself. “He evidently wants
to start a romance,” and the idea amused her.
From sheer exuberance of energy she had come
hither, seeking nothing in her masquerade but
relief from boredom, and lo! she had landed
a prize like this!</p>

<p>“At any rate, I need not have taken a circuitous
route to Schramm’s!” she said laughingly.</p>

<p>At the gaming-table nothing sensational was
going on. She decided to feint with him, and
said sarcastically:</p>

<p>“You try to disguise your compliments as well
as you do yourself, Herr von Wenk. I am obliged
to accept them, since they take me unawares.”</p>

<p>“I merely mean,” persisted Wenk, “that the
removal of the coronet from your monogram
cannot remove the stamp of nobility from your
brow.”</p>

<p>“I hope you are still masquerading!”</p>

<p>“As an enraptured reader of sentimental
romances, you mean? In any case, dear lady....
But is this quite the place to carry on a conversation
which aims at a more serious turn?”</p>

<p>She answered, looking him up and down<span class="pagenum" id="Page_95">[95]</span>
haughtily and deliberately: “Does that mean that
you are inviting me to sup with you?”</p>

<p>“I would certainly not venture to do that,”
said Wenk hastily, recognizing her meaning. He
saw that she suspected him of desiring to establish
an intrigue, and that he would begin it in the
ordinary way of a champagne supper. “Now,”
said he to himself, “if I am to win her over,
I must act in such a way as not to deceive
her and yet not fulfil her expectations, and since
she thinks she has guessed me aright, I must
not allow her a feeling of superiority over me.
I do not want her to think me a blockhead. The
coronet on the handkerchief seems genuine enough,
and she does not come here for money, for she
never plays. Therefore someone present, or an
adventure of some sort, must account for her being
here, and if I am to win her to my side I must
prove myself stronger than the unknown attraction
here,” he argued.</p>

<p>“What have you to offer me?” she asked
in a frivolous tone; but Wenk seemed to find
something real behind the thoughtless manner, and
he answered intuitively, fearing defeat as soon as
the words had left his lips:</p>

<p>“I can offer you a great adventure, a really
great adventure!”</p>

<p>“With you?” she rejoined, equally without
pausing for reflection. “As a lover or as an
agent of the State?”</p>

<p>“With me—as a detective!”</p>

<p>“<i>Can</i> you?” she asked disdainfully.</p>

<p>“Shall I give you proofs? Last night I was
decoyed into a car and left in the freezing cold<span class="pagenum" id="Page_96">[96]</span>
lying on a bench in the Schleissheim Park,
stupefied by gas. To-day, but twenty-four hours
later, I am aware that the man who did this, or
ordered it to be done, is the same whom you
saw playing recently as the old Professor, and
that this same learned old fellow is also the
sandy-bearded man to whom you saw Basch lose
his money here.”</p>

<p>“Is that true?” she asked in a serious tone.</p>

<p>“Absolutely.”</p>

<p>“The man ... with the reddish beard ...
who ... sat ... there?”</p>

<p>“The man who sat opposite Basch like a beast
of prey!”</p>

<p>“And what am I ... what have I to do with
it?”</p>

<p>“To help me find this man, from whom others
must be rescued.”</p>

<p>“I can’t help admiring him!”</p>

<p>“I do not minimize his powers, but there are
powers which are evil in their influence.”</p>

<p>“And yet more really human and greater than
those that are called good!” she cried; and her
bosom, slender and youthful as a girl’s, swelled
as she confronted Wenk.</p>

<p>“Ah, now I understand you, dear lady. Listen.
Not more really human or greater, for power is
power. One display of it cannot be measured
by another; it is only its essence we can judge.
Everything is human, the good as well as the
bad. Evil forces only reap their advantage through
the destruction of good ones, and this advantage
is for the destroyer alone. The forces of good
benefit all without yielding their possessor that<span class="pagenum" id="Page_97">[97]</span>
gross material gain which he who practises evil
strives to attain. Which is the nobler? That is
what you must ask yourself, and if there is an
exuberance of energy in your temperament which
you cannot make use of in the class of society to
which you belong, and yet do not desire to keep
inactive.... However, these people are beginning
to notice our talk. I expect the blond has
his spies everywhere. Allow me to take leave of
you and request an opportunity of continuing this
conversation.”</p>

<p>“Come and see me to-morrow; come at tea-time
please. Ask for Countess Told, at Tutzing.”</p>

<p>She gave him her hand. Wenk, to whom her
name supplied the clue to that mysterious flight
when Count Told had entered the room, kissed
her slender fingers, yielding himself momentarily
to her charm and beauty, and toying with the
foolish notion of abandoning his chase of criminals
and yielding to the pursuit of this woman. With
these thoughts in his mind, he said farewell.</p>

<p>Left to herself, the Countess reflected: “We
women have no imagination. I was looking for
an adventure among these gamblers absorbed in
their play, and when it presented itself I imagined
it was but an intrigue. But <i>this</i> is a man, indeed!
He devotes his life to his task, and no man can
give more than his life, and there is nothing greater
or more beautiful than life. If only I had the chance
of doing likewise!” She resolved to follow Wenk’s
leading and do all that she could to help him.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Among his letters next morning Wenk noticed
a small registered parcel. He opened it, to find<span class="pagenum" id="Page_98">[98]</span>
his watch and his purse with the money intact.
The notebook alone was missing, and on a card
these words were typed: “I am no ghoul. The
things my subordinate took from you in error
are returned herewith. I am keeping the notebook
because its contents concern me.—<span class="smcap">Balling.</span>”</p>

<p>Wenk was scarcely surprised. This man had
thousands at stake; what were a few beggarly
hundreds and a gold watch to him? He did not
need this to convince him that it was really himself,
and more particularly his notebook, that was
concerned. He put away both watch and purse
and let his thoughts linger on the alluring Countess.</p>

<p>In the afternoon he was received at her house,
a mansion sumptuously arranged, but in a style
that offended Wenk, for since yesterday his ideas
of the Countess had made considerable advance,
and it would have been pleasant to find himself
more in sympathy with her tastes than this home
of hers evidenced.</p>

<p>In the very entrance-hall the walls had been
painted all over in Cubist forms and conventional
designs tortured into weird shapes in endless
succession, with splashes of colour here and there,
as if to create an impression of the ardent temperament
of the designer. “You are cold and
passionless,” said he to himself; “of so calculating
and cold a nature that if one among you
disappears, the others have not enough red blood
in their veins to notice his absence?”</p>

<p>The butler, the dark severity of whose livery was
lightened by small silver buttons and blue lappets,
took his hat and coat from him and announced him
to the Countess, who was sitting at the tea-table.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_99">[99]</span>“We shall not be alone long,” she said; “my
husband will be home at five o’clock.”</p>

<p>But the decorations of the house had made
Wenk feel unsympathetic, and before he answered
he cast a hasty glance at the walls of the room.
The Countess noticed it.</p>

<p>“That is all my husband’s doing,” she said.
“To me it appears simply hideous. What are
you to make out of it, if one paints a peasant,
indicates some freshly painted barns, and then tells
the beholder that it is a symphony of Beethoven’s?
However, every one to his taste—or are you
perhaps a ‘Futurist’ also?”</p>

<p>“I cannot say that,” said Wenk, “but you
seem to imply that they are the only moderns.
Yet all men in secret speak the same language.
Our freedom to express ourselves comes only from
individuality!”</p>

<p>“You want to be free?” said the lady. “Are
you not your own salvation? Does not your calling,
your expenditure of energy, give you your inner
freedom? There is no salvation from without!”</p>

<p>“That is quite true,” said Wenk simply; and
the womanly image which had haunted him
since yesterday, and which seemed to be lost on
entering this house, once more returned to his
mind. “It is really what we were talking of
yesterday, this balance of the forces of good and
evil, and I wanted to talk to you about that again
to-day.”</p>

<p>“I understood you aright,” answered the
Countess. “I will confess to you that at first
I thought you were on the search for an intrigue,
and the idea amused me considerably, for God<span class="pagenum" id="Page_100">[100]</span>
knows I seek something very different in the
gaming-houses.”</p>

<p>“You will find what you are seeking in my
work, Countess,” rejoined Wenk quickly.</p>

<p>Suddenly the butler, in his black livery, with
its blue lappets and silver buttons, appeared noiselessly,
and bent down whispering something to
his mistress.</p>

<p>“My husband!” said the Countess to Wenk,
fixing a steady and lingering glance on him, and
as the Count came forward she introduced the
two men.</p>

<p>Count Told was an extremely thin man, and
gave an impression of excessive sprightliness. He
was surprisingly young and very fashionably
dressed. He gesticulated a good deal, and the
movement of his hands gave prominence to a ring
he wore, set with an unusual gem, such as Wenk
had never before seen.</p>

<p>It might have been a flame topaz, with streaks
of blood-red across it, trailing off into milky
whiteness at the edges and emphasizing the clear
honey colour of the transparent stone. In the
middle of it, just where its lightning rays were
most dazzling, was a tiny pearl, an islet, hardly
larger than a freckle, but of a blue that put the
sapphire into the shade, and....</p>

<p>Thus Wenk was thinking to himself, unable to
keep his eyes from the jewel.</p>

<p>“It is a trifle too big for my hand,” said the
Count, answering his visitor’s unspoken thoughts,
“but the stone is so ... how shall I describe
its originality? Well, I can only say that it is
like a recital by Endivian, whom you doubtless<span class="pagenum" id="Page_101">[101]</span>
know, and it was he who gave it to me. He
brought it back from Penderappimur.”</p>

<p>“Is he the fashionable jeweller nowadays?”
asked Wenk, who seemed somewhat at sea.</p>

<p>“Herr von Wenk,” said the Countess gravely,
“Endivian is the fashionable young Goethe of this
season.” Then she laughed. “No! Endivian
the poet received the jewel at the Court of
Artimerxes II, instead of the goblet, from the
poem of his spiritual father ... you know it,
‘Give me no golden chain’ ... and when he
returned, he announced in Germany, much as the
Pope announces the Golden Rose, that his greatest
admirer should have it. The choice fell upon my
husband. It would have been better if he had
given it me.”</p>

<p>“Why don’t you enthuse about him as I do?”
asked the Count, with a pleasant smile, looking
at her very tenderly as he spoke.</p>

<p>“Peter Resch dedicated his rubbish to him,
and that was enough for me,” was the Countess’s
laughing retort.</p>

<p>“Pooh, Peter Resch, indeed!” said the Count.
“He is one of the Impressionists who has arrived.
By the way, dearest, I have got something new.”</p>

<p>“From the Jennifer gallery?”</p>

<p>“Can one get a real picture anywhere else?
There is nothing left.... And one has a clear
and incontestable and direct impression. If the
artistic temperament would only renounce colour
... it would be the beginning of really abstract
thought, of the detachment from everything which
needs the help of another consciousness to interpret
its vision.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_102">[102]</span>The Countess replied, with apparent earnestness:
“Thank Heaven, we do get a little further. If
in the realm of music, too, genius had any prospect
of renouncing the crash of sound when it desires
to express itself, the world would soon be attaining
its aim.”</p>

<p>The Count went on enthusiastically: “A sublime
atmosphere of space ... in two blues ...
which project into the cosmogony and play upon
each other between storm and lightning....</p>

<p>“Whereupon the Almighty leaves His seat, dear
Herr von Wenk, saying, ‘My creation has surpassed
Me; I take My leave!’”</p>

<p>The conversation continued in this tone for
awhile, and an hour later Wenk took his leave.
He felt depressed as he drove home, but he had
hardly sat down to dinner when a note was brought
him, and he read:</p>

<div class="blockquot">
<p><span class="smcap">Dear Herr von Wenk</span>,</p>

<p>I am sorry that our meeting to-day fell out differently
from the one we had planned. That is not why I am writing
to you, however, for we can continue our conversation in
another place and at another time. But you may have left
our house under the impression that my husband was
“nothing but a fool,” and in his wife’s eyes too, and that
would have been my fault, so I want to entreat you not to
allow yourself to take up a depreciatory attitude. It is
true that the Count buys Futurist pictures, but that must
be understood more or less symbolically. I have always
found that the more “foolish” a man appeared at one’s
first encounter with him, the more approachable he became
when one met him in his more serious moments.</p>

<p>Au revoir ... but when, and where?</p>

<p class="right"><span class="indentright2">Yours sincerely,</span><br/>
<span class="smcap">Lucy Told</span>.</p>
</div>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_103">[103]</span>“So Lucy is her name? And indeed she is
rightly called Light. If she were <i>my</i> light of
life!... Oh, what a fool I am,” said he, as he
felt an unaccustomed warmth steal over him—a
warmth for which he always yearned.... Then
he stood up, shaking off these delicious tremors,
and saying sternly to himself, “This is a pretty
way to reach a criminal ... through falling in
love with a beautiful woman.”</p>

<p>The telephone rang: “Hull speaking!”</p>

<p>Hull told him that a new gaming-house had
been opened, and he really must visit it. The
saloon was not only arranged to accommodate a
large number of people, at least a hundred, but it
had certain mechanical contrivances which could
turn it into a music-hall if the police were to
appear. He did not know how it was done,
but Cara had written to him about it and she
was always <i>au courant</i> of any new sensation of
this kind. They were going there, and taking
Karstens with them, but Hull did not know the
address of this place, and they would trust to
Cara’s guidance. Of course, she knew nothing
about his writing to Wenk.</p>

<p>A rendezvous was arranged, and at ten o’clock
Wenk drove to the Café Bastin, whence they were
to set out.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_104">[104]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">VII</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> house they entered lay on the border of
the inner city, in one of the mean, sordid streets
leading to Schwabing. Its outward appearance,
like its neighbours’, showed an unimposing façade.
It was one of those shops having lodgings above,
and the sliding shutters over the shop were drawn
to the ground. It was too dark to read the name,
but Wenk noticed the number, that of his birth-year—’76.</p>

<p>They entered a dirty stairway in which hung
a dusty globe, which gave an indifferent light to
the changing population who inhabited such houses
as these, and then ascended two flights of stairs.
A heavy door opened before them, and in a corridor
at the side a light shone out over the miserable
staircase. The corridor ran alongside the staircase;
it was completely empty: a cheap and
shabby black and white drugget ran throughout
its length, and its walls were covered with faded
paper-hangings.</p>

<p>“This is lively,” said Cara, “but just wait a
moment!”</p>

<p>Then a small door opened from the corridor
and a light streamed forth into the gloomy darkness.
They looked upon a swelter of luxury.
There was a little <i>foyer</i> with cushions and curtains,
cloakroom accommodation, little restaurant tables,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_105">[105]</span>
etc. There was the odour of prepared foods and
the popping of champagne corks. People they
did not know were sitting there. The visitors
laid aside hats and coats and went through into
the restaurant.</p>

<p>Yes, there things looked different. On entry,
the place recalled the promenade of a well-known
Théâtre de Variétés in Paris. Through little peep-holes
or from the boxes one could see a smooth
surface gleaming with light. This was the
gaming-table, and it was of immense size. In
the middle there was a circular opening in which
was placed a large revolving chair. It was the
seat for the croupier. Around the table the places
for the players were arranged like boxes. Every
box—there were some single ones, some for two
and some for four persons—lay shut off from the
rest and in darkness, and all were furnished with
comfortable seats. People could be entirely
separated from each other by a curtain, and a
grating, like those of the Parisian theatres, could
be drawn at will. The players might gamble
there as securely as if masked, and, without being
recognized or even seen, could indulge their passion
for the tables.</p>

<p>Two miniature rails led from each seat to the
croupier, and upon these stood a little truck.
This was to carry the stakes down and later bring
the winnings back. The sum was made known
by sliding numbers displayed on a board. The
pressure of a button sent each vehicle to its
destined spot.</p>

<p>On the dome above the table, in the circle
formed by the boxes, were the <i>petits chevaux</i> in<span class="pagenum" id="Page_106">[106]</span>
varied colours. The little brass horses had been
carved by a Cubist, and painted in their various
colours with highly glazed enamel. They were
set in motion by a crank turned by the croupier.
In the middle, beneath the horses, there hung
a little searchlight which, lighted from below,
reflected light upon the dome, and in this light
they ran with the dome as a background. This
was painted in the colours of the spectrum
arranged alternately, so that there was always a
dark horse against a light colour and a light
one against a dark colour, followed by their
shadows. This gave the effect of promiscuity which
was intensified the faster they ran. The goal was
formed by a thin strip of tiny electric lights let
into the dome, and every box had an arrangement
of mirrors by which its occupants could clearly
recognize the winner.</p>

<p>Wenk and his companions took their places in
a box for four, which seemed to have been
reserved for them. Cara and Karstens sat in
front, the two other men behind.</p>

<p>When the boxes were all filled, the croupier
gathered his elegant evening dress about him, and
slowly began to revolve in his seat, as if on a
mechanical rotating disk, while he delivered the
following oration:</p>

<p>“Ladies and gentlemen, this is the ‘Go-ahead’
Institute. The ‘Go-ahead’ has in itself the roots
of vigour and success. We live in times of change,
and our undertaking is designed to suit all comers.
Here you can play alone, or as a pair, or in
company. You can play alone, because you can
have a box for one person only, like the charming<span class="pagenum" id="Page_107">[107]</span>
lady of whom I can see no more than the red
heron’s feathers in her coiffure. If you think that
for good luck two heads are better than one, you
can seclude yourself from your fellows like yonder
elegant cavalier and his lady; and if you choose
to play in company you are equally invisible from
my point of view. In the dome, ladies and gentlemen,
you will find our game, the game of the
house, I may venture to call it, although every
other game is equally at your service. There you
see the <i>petits chevaux</i> of the ‘Go-ahead’ Institute.
One of the first artists of our day, whose work you
are constantly encountering in exhibitions and
periodicals, has designed them for the ‘Go-ahead,’
and placed them here, and we have united art
with technique, the strongest product of the age.
The reflecting apparatus allows everyone from any
place whatsoever to see at once and quite distinctly
whether his horse is in at the finish. Allow me
to demonstrate to you, by a mere turn of the
handle, the very artistic and effective play and
counterplay which is developing in the dome.
There was once a man who had no shadow, but
that cannot be said of our <i>petits chevaux</i>. Notice,
I beseech you, the extremely artistic effect produced
when substance and shadow thus unite in a piece
of work which in its resourcefulness and originality
does the greatest credit to the artist of our
house....”</p>

<p>He turned the crank, and horses and shadows
chased each other with kaleidoscopic effect. It
formed a pretty and a fanciful picture. Slowly
the horses came to a standstill.</p>

<p>“I had staked on that one,” exclaimed a<span class="pagenum" id="Page_108">[108]</span>
woman’s voice as the cream-coloured bay stopped
beneath the goal, and in its head the eyes gleamed
forth like stars. They were formed of small
electric lamps.</p>

<p>The croupier said: “I will not detain you
much longer from trying your luck, dear madam.
I have only now to introduce to you the epoch-making
novelty of the ‘Go-ahead’ Institute.
What would you do, ladies and gentlemen” (here
he raised his voice), “if the police were suddenly
to intrude upon you and rob you of your money
and your freedom on account of your forbidden
game? You need have no anxiety on that score.
We have hit upon an arrangement which might
be called a <i>garde-police</i>. The ‘Go-ahead’
Institute may await the police quite calmly. They
may be surrounded and inundated by the police.
With a pressure of my little finger I can turn the
whole police force of the city away from you
and let them go ahead elsewhere. Look here!”</p>

<p>He raised his hand, then lowered it with affected
impressiveness, pressing his forefinger down upon
the black knob near him. A moment later the
surface of the table was set in motion, and it began
to sink. It moved rapidly and noiselessly, and
the speaker sank down with it. The boxes
remained stationary, but from the dome the little
horses and the coloured circles descended—came
past the boxes; the dome followed, and a few
minutes later a quartette of nude twelve-year-old
children were to be seen dancing, upon a new
stage, to the strains of fiddles and harps, which
began to resound from some invisible quarter. A
body of men, dressed in the uniform of the city<span class="pagenum" id="Page_109">[109]</span>
police, trooped into the boxes, exclaiming, “We
were told they were gambling here! Where are
the gamblers?”</p>

<p>Everybody in the boxes roared with laughter.
The girls continued dancing, and the uniformed
police threw off their disguise and appeared in
evening dress, laughing. The floor began to move
again, the girls still dancing, one of them making
a gesture to a gentleman sitting alone, who sprang
towards her, but failed to reach his vanishing
charmer. The floor once more became the ceiling,
the <i>petits chevaux</i> reappeared, and in the centre
of the gaming-table sat the croupier once again.</p>

<p>“You see, ladies and gentlemen, we do give
the police something for their pains—the nude
girls! And if the case were really serious, they
would soon have a scrap of clothing on. I have
to announce that there is a change of programme
every week....” He continued for some time
further in this way.</p>

<p>“This is only an ordinary cinema,” said Wenk,
turning to Karstens, and whispering, “the most
ordinary kind of cinema. If the police were to
come, they would discover the whole trick in ten
minutes.”</p>

<p>Karstens merely shrugged his shoulders.</p>

<p>Wenk wondered what the aim of such an
establishment could be, for it was bound to be
discovered and closed within a week’s time, and
the outlay must have been considerable.</p>

<p>Hull was much struck, having nothing with
which to compare what he saw and heard there.</p>

<p>“Ravishing! enchanting!” said Cara from time
to time. “We live in ingenious times, don’t<span class="pagenum" id="Page_110">[110]</span>
we? We must come here often, mustn’t we, Eddie?
Which are you going to stake on? I am choosing
the black Arab. Black for me, please Eddie,
because you are so fair!”</p>

<p>Karstens cast an amused glance at Wenk. A
supper of the most varied and recherché dainties
was provided. Things which seemed to have
vanished in the depreciation of the German
currency were seen—<i>pâté de foie gras</i>, fresh
truffles, caviare, fieldfares.... In front of a pile
of truffles and <i>foie gras</i>, inhaling its pleasant odour,
Karstens said suddenly:</p>

<p>“Our mark to-day stands at seven in Switzerland,
but it is seven centimes, and here things
which we have forgotten we ever ordered are
provided for us.”</p>

<p>“Here a mark is worth less than seven
centimes,” said Wenk, downcast and depressed.
Whither was it all tending? His heart yearned
for help in his enterprise, and he had no appetite
for dainties.</p>

<p>Cara trilled a popular ditty, and Hull, in spite
of the influence which she exercised over him,
and his enjoyment of unwonted dainties, began
secretly to be somewhat ashamed. He resolved
to send her a parting present on the morrow,
and it should be the parure of Australian opals
she so ardently desired, which a Russian princess,
anxious to get on the stage by Cara’s help, was
willing to sell. “This should end it all,” said Hull
to himself. He was disenchanted, and yet at the
same time melancholy. What would become of
her? For himself, he almost thought he would
prefer the cloister to....</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_111">[111]</span>Just then he savoured a delicious mouthful of
truffle, and as he smacked his lips over it, Hull
thought, “Well, there’s something to be said for
this sort of thing, after all. I should not get
any more aspic ... and I’ve not broken with
her yet, anyhow!...”</p>

<p>Suddenly Wenk got up to go.</p>

<p>“Where are you off to?” cried Cara, excited
in a moment.</p>

<p>Karstens turned to her at this instant, separating
her from Wenk, who left the hall undisturbed.
He took his overcoat quickly from the vestibule
and was conducted downstairs. The concierge
opened the door for him, looking first through the
peep-hole into the street. Then he exclaimed in
great excitement: “Sir, there is a policeman
standing there!” He opened the door, however,
and Wenk went out. The policeman saluted.
Wenk saw the uniformed official smiling, and
looking back, found the concierge smiling too.
The “policeman” belonged to the “Go-ahead”
Institute. If a real policeman were to enter the
street, as the concierge hastily informed the departing
guest, he would see that there was already
someone on guard and move off.</p>

<p>Wenk soon reached the spot where he had
ordered his chauffeur to wait. He was resolved
to have this place closed, but he did not want
the affair to get into the papers, and on his drive
homeward he was considering how best to formulate
the charge. If possible the place should not be
described, but the cause should be given as that
of disturbance of the peace, misleading of the
public, swindling performances, or something of<span class="pagenum" id="Page_112">[112]</span>
that kind. He worked the matter out fully,
engaged in his conflict with the “Go-ahead”
Institute, and while still in his car, in his character
of prosecuting counsel, he conducted an indictment
which through his skill and stratagem should
eliminate this plague-spot from public life without
folks perceiving what it actually was.</p>

<p>Before he slept, his thoughts, without any
apparent connection to guide them, reverted to
Hull, who stood suddenly revealed to him as
typical of the young men of the age. Bound by
a liaison with a vulgar, good-for-nothing girl,
whose only talent was to exhibit herself on the
stage; elegantly dressed, without being elegant;
spending his restless evenings between gaming-houses,
night-clubs, and the arms of a courtesan—this
was Hull’s life. Yet if he had taken the
right turn he might have put his intelligence and
all his available energies into administering an
estate or pursuing a well-ordered peaceful life as
an official of some kind; he might have been
the head of a happy household and the father of
legitimate children.</p>

<p>Many such men there were, strong in body and
mind, living merely on their nerves, dedicating
to a life of the senses powers which would have
made them successful in the walk of life for which
they were destined. Hull and his kind, feeble
and enervated, represented the spirit of the age.
What would the dawn of such a midnight
yield?</p>

<p>Wenk went to the telephone and gave the
address of the new gaming-house. The official
whose duty it was to watch over Herr Hull was<span class="pagenum" id="Page_113">[113]</span>
to get in touch with him at once, but do no
more than keep him in sight when he left the
house.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>In the middle of a deep sleep the telephone
at Wenk’s bedside began ringing. It was just
two hours since he had returned home, and he
was wide awake at once. “Wenk speaking!”
said he, and he felt certain in some subconscious
region of his mind, which was in tune with his
last waking thoughts, that the news awaiting him
on the telephone was in some dread, mysterious
fashion concerned with Hull.</p>

<p>“Wenk speaking!” he called again, and his
whole body was trembling with excitement.</p>

<p>“Here, sir; the police sergeant on duty.”</p>

<p>“Be quick!” said Wenk, his imagination
running riot. What was there to report?</p>

<p>The voice at the other end spoke hastily: “The
gentleman named Edgar Hull, who was under
police protection ... has been murdered this
night. In the open street, too, about 2 a.m.
Another gentleman, name of Karstens, has been
seriously wounded. The constable who was
detailed to watch over him is also wounded, and
both have been taken to the hospital. A lady
who was with these gentlemen was arrested at
the order of the wounded man. I have ordered
the body to be left lying exactly as it was
found until you have seen it yourself. The
Service car is on its way to your honour. Please
ring off!”</p>

<p>“Ring off!” echoed Wenk’s voice agitatedly.</p>

<p>He hastened to dress, for the car was already<span class="pagenum" id="Page_114">[114]</span>
to be heard throbbing outside. He went down
the dark staircase, forgetting to turn a light on.
Then, when he perceived the car in the street,
his profile revealed the jaws drawn firmly together,
in the necessity of meeting calmly the tragic circumstances
in which he was involved, and entering
into every detail of this deed of blood perpetrated
in the darkness of the night, so that he might be
enabled to act to the best advantage.</p>

<p>During the drive, something within him
compelled him to take himself to task. “I had
no business to tremble,” he thought, “when this
news reached me. I must be prepared to face
even my own death unflinchingly. I must school
myself further. I must develop all my tastes and
interests and use them in the service of my
life’s goal; then only shall I be equal to my
task....”</p>

<p>Hull’s body lay in the darkness. Four men
in sombre clothing were silhouetted around him,
and they stepped back as their chief descended
from the car. Wenk ordered them—they were
constables—to watch the entrances to the street
and allow no one to approach the scene of the
murder, which was in a gloomy street-turning
behind the Wittelsbach Palace. Not a soul was
to be seen in any of the houses.</p>

<p>One of the constables said that none of the
public had been near the place since the
occurrence.</p>

<p>It was now three o’clock in the morning. By
the light of an electric torch Wenk gazed upon
the corpse. There was a gaping wound from
the neck down the back, and the body lay with<span class="pagenum" id="Page_115">[115]</span>
its face to the earth. Thus the police had found
Hull when their colleague, blinded with pepper
and bleeding from a wound, whistled for help.
The body lay motionless, curled up like the gnarled
root of a tree. The blood which had flowed
from its wounds shone like black marble under
the searching light. Wenk was convulsed with
horror at the mental images he sought to overcome.
He tried to photograph the details of the
scene upon his memory, getting the exact position
of the corpse. He wrote down the number of
the house, tried to ascertain whether all the doors
and windows in the neighbourhood were closed,
whether any footprints could be seen, or any objects
connected with the crime found in the immediate
vicinity, but nothing was to be discovered. Its
perpetrators had escaped into the palace grounds,
one of the policemen had told him, and at one
bound they had disappeared. Wenk examined
the walls; there, too, there was nothing to be
learnt.</p>

<p>He sent a constable to fetch a car to remove
the body, and ordered that nobody was to come
into the street on any account. Those who tried
to force their way in should be arrested, but
people were to be treated with politeness, he said.
He then drove to the hospital where the wounded
men were lying.</p>

<p>He found Karstens unconscious, and the doctor
informed him that he had had a severe wound
in the back from a narrow and apparently four-edged
dagger, and a blow from some blunt object
had probably been aimed at his head. The
constable had not been so severely handled, and<span class="pagenum" id="Page_116">[116]</span>
his were mainly flesh-wounds. His shoulder and
upper arm were bandaged, but he could scarcely
open his eyes even yet.</p>

<p>He related his story thus:</p>

<p>“Just before 2 a.m. the deceased, with a lady
and another gentleman, came out of the house
which had been pointed out to me. In front of it
a constable was standing, and that seemed odd,
for I thought to myself, ‘Why is he standing
there instead of being on his beat?’ He stood
there for at least an hour; then I thought I would
speak to him, but he said roughly, ‘What do <i>you</i>
want? Go away,’ and came threateningly towards
me. I was just going to show him my number-plate
when the door opened, and although it was
dark I could recognize Herr von Hull. The
constable pushed me away, and as I did not want
to be noticed I moved aside, but I saw that
Herr von Hull had a lady and gentleman with
him. They went off quickly in the direction of
the Ludwigstrasse, and the policeman and I were
about three houses away in the other direction.
Then he turned to the house again, saying to me,
‘Now you had better be off!’ I didn’t bother
any more about him, but followed, at some
distance, the lady and the two gentlemen. They
turned out of the Türkenstrasse into the
Gabelsbergerstrasse and disappeared from my
sight. I hurried after them, but could not see
them anywhere. They could not have got any
further than the Jägerstrasse. Suddenly I heard
cries; they were shrill and then stifled. The war
had taught me that that was how men in fear of
death cry out. Before I could even see anybody<span class="pagenum" id="Page_117">[117]</span>
I whistled for help, and ran to the street as hard
as I could, drawing my revolver.</p>

<p>“I hadn’t gone far when I was suddenly
seized from behind. My eyes smarted terribly, and
I felt a thrust in my shoulder. I wanted to pull
the trigger, but my revolver was no longer in
my hand and my arm hung quite limp. Then I
thought, ‘I had better do as our major used to
advise us—fall down and lie as if I were dead.’
So I fell down and someone sat on me, and
shoved something at me, holding my mouth. There
may have been two of them; I can’t tell, for I
closed my eyes. They must have rushed at me
from a doorway, and I was half insensible by that
time. What happened after that I do not distinctly
remember, but I heard footsteps running, and I
was lifted up. It was another constable, and I
quickly told him what had happened and he ran
on into the street. Then a second one came
running up. ‘Police!’ I shouted to him. ‘Yes,’
he called back; ‘what is the matter?’ ‘Run
round the corner, quick!’ I told him.</p>

<p>“I forced myself to rise, and then found I
was not so badly wounded after all, though I
couldn’t open my eyes. They had thrown pepper
at them. I groped my way round the corner,
but I could not see anything. It was the noise
that guided me to the spot. I heard someone
speaking, and a woman’s voice answering. ‘What
is the matter?’ I said, and a voice answered,
‘He said we were to take the female into custody.’
‘Who are you?’ I asked the woman, and she
answered, ‘I am an actress, the friend of Herr
Hull. What do you want with me?’ I said,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_118">[118]</span>
‘If the gentleman said so, arrest her!’ She protested,
and said she wanted to speak to Dr.
Wenk, the State agent, at once, but the constable
said she could do that later. Then she tried
to run away, and there was a good deal of
confusion and bother, and finally the constable
had to handcuff her, she was so defiant, and I
heard her call out ‘George.’ So I told them to
arrest her, and I don’t know what happened after
that, for I fainted, and when I came to again I
was in the ambulance. I am badly wounded.
Will your honour please tell me the truth: am
I going to die?”</p>

<p>Then the doctor laughed in his face.</p>

<p>“No, please, I want his honour to tell me.
It’s the doctor’s job to tell people they are not
going to die.”</p>

<p>“But, my good Voss, how can you imagine
you are going to die? You have some flesh-wounds
and some nasty bumps, but a man like
you doesn’t die of those things!”</p>

<p>“Indeed, your honour, I have done my duty!”
said the injured man. His voice began to falter;
then the tension relaxed and he began to weep
quietly and unrestrainedly. “I know ... no
more.... I have ... done ... my duty!”
he stammered.</p>

<p>“You don’t need to tell me that,” said Wenk
reassuringly. “He who stakes his life upon it
certainly does his duty, for no one can offer anything
he values more! But now, Voss, I want you
to promise me something, and shake hands upon it.
You won’t tell anyone else what you have seen or
gone through this night ... and I beg the same<span class="pagenum" id="Page_119">[119]</span>
thing of you, doctor. A great deal depends upon
it, for the public at large. I beg you to lay
this very much to heart. It is not the pursuit
of one crime, but of a generation of crime.”</p>

<p>From the constable who had been first on the
spot Wenk learnt that he had seen several figures
near the wall of the park, but darkness prevented
his counting their number, nor could he describe
them. He was stopped by one of the gentlemen,
who tried to stand up and then clutched hold of
him, saying two or three times over, “Arrest the
woman—arrest the woman.”</p>

<p>“Then at last he fell back and let me go,”
went on the man. “Then I could run a few
steps and I saw those figures close to the wall
going round the park, but when I reached it,
there was no one there. They must have had
accomplices on the other side of the wall. I
wanted to go after them, but I couldn’t manage
it; it was far too high to climb, so I came back
to the spot.”</p>

<p>“And the woman?” asked Wenk. “What
about her?”</p>

<p>“I had the impression....”</p>

<p>“Now, Stamm, I don’t want to hear your
<i>impressions</i>—I only want to know what you saw
with your eyes and heard with your ears. You
will be scrupulously exact, won’t you?”</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed, your honour. When I came back,
one of our men was holding the woman fast.
I said to him, ‘Arrest her; the gentleman there
said so. Arrest her at all costs! Hold her fast,
don’t let her escape!’ We were all a bit excited,
and she shouted out that she wanted to see<span class="pagenum" id="Page_120">[120]</span>
Herr von Wenk, and no one was going to arrest
<i>her</i>. She made a good deal of resistance, sir,
and finally we had to tie her hands. There were
only two of us, and we had to help the wounded
and our own colleague. We did not know in the
least what had happened, for we had only
just....”</p>

<p>“<i>We?</i> Tell me only what you yourself have
seen.”</p>

<p>“Then I began to try and find out what had
happened. There was a man lying on the ground
bathed in blood. He seemed to be dead, for he
was quite still. The other was groaning. Then
a third constable came up, and we sent him to
telephone for the ambulance and make a report
to the Criminal Division and let your honour know.
That was what Voss had told us to do first of
all.”</p>

<p>“What was the woman doing all this time?”</p>

<p>“The second of our men took her to the
guard-room.”</p>

<p>“Don’t go on with your story, Stamm, till I
have spoken to him. What is his name? Keep
yourself in readiness to report again; do you hear?
And remember, not a word of this outside the
official circle—not even to your wife. Give me
your word of honour!”</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed, sir. The other man’s name is
Wasserschmidt.”</p>

<p>Wasserschmidt duly appeared.</p>

<p>“You arrested a woman to-night who was
present when the two gentlemen were attacked,”
said Wenk. “Why did you do that?”</p>

<p>“I did it because constable Stamm said that<span class="pagenum" id="Page_121">[121]</span>
one of the gentlemen, before he became insensible,
called out to him to do so, and my colleague
Voss gave me the order too.”</p>

<p>At this moment the telephone rang in the bureau
of the Criminal Investigation Department, where
Wenk was conducting these inquiries.</p>

<p>“Who is speaking?” he asked.</p>

<p>“This is the night editor’s office of the Central
News Agency. We have just been informed of a
murder....”</p>

<p>“One moment, please,” said Wenk angrily.
“Who gave you that information?”</p>

<p>“I can tell you that without betraying any
editorial secrets, for it was given anonymously,
so to speak. Our night-bell rang, and as I went
to the window I saw a man going away. When
I opened it and asked what was the matter, he
called out, ‘Look in the letter-box!’ Then I
went down and found a letter in the box.”</p>

<p>“Can you read me what was in the letter?
The State agent for prosecutions is speaking!”</p>

<p>“Yes, certainly, sir, one moment. The letter
runs: ‘Edgar Hull, Esquire, was attacked and
murdered in the Jägerstrasse in the early hours
of this morning. The criminals have escaped. It
appears to have been an act of revenge, for the
murdered man frequented gambling circles.’ That’s
all there is.”</p>

<p>“Does anybody in the newspaper staff know
about this letter?”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“Can you bring this letter to me yourself immediately?
I will send a Service car for you.”</p>

<p>“But, sir, that would be a very difficult matter.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_122">[122]</span>
I am alone here, and I must complete the Press
matter.”</p>

<p>“What is your name?”</p>

<p>“Grube.”</p>

<p>“Well, Herr Grube, there’s no difficulty in the
matter, when I tell you very decidedly that your
coming here is of the utmost importance, far and
away more important than that to-morrow morning
every Tom, Dick and Harry should be able to
discuss such a piece of news while he eats his
breakfast.”</p>

<p>“But my duty is ...” he began, but Wenk
interrupted him.</p>

<p>“Don’t take it ill that my time won’t permit
of my saying any more now, save that the police
car is on its way to bring you here. The
constable is furnished with the necessary authority.
Arrange your Press matter so that the sheet can
be printed without the information you have just
given me about a murder. Au revoir, Herr
Grube. Ring off, please.”</p>

<p>Wenk sent off the car immediately.</p>

<p>“Well, now, Wasserschmidt, to continue. The
lady offered resistance. How did she do that?”</p>

<p>“She ran a few paces from me towards the
wall of the Wittelsbach Palace, to which the
criminals had hurried, and then called out,
‘George.’”</p>

<p>“You heard that yourself?”</p>

<p>“Yes, quite distinctly, and she pronounced the
name ‘Georsh.’ And as she began to run towards
the wall too, I did not wait any longer, but I tied
her hands together.”</p>

<p>“And what did she do then?”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_123">[123]</span>“Then she became quieter, and let us take her
away. As we were going, she said again, ‘I
shall certainly be able to speak to Herr von
Wenk, shall I not?’ ‘Well, you will have to
wait till after he has had his breakfast,’ I said.
‘Perhaps I could telephone to him?’ but I said
that wasn’t very likely.”</p>

<p>“And then later? Where is the lady now?”</p>

<p>“Still at the guard-room. She spoke quite
calmly and said, ‘You have made a very serious
mistake, my good man; but I hope to be able
to set you right with Herr Wenk, for, after all,
you are only doing what you conceive to be your
duty. I was with the gentleman who has been
attacked, and the State Attorney was there too,
but he went home a little earlier, or else he would
have been in it as well.’ ‘Let us wait and see!’
was all I said to that.”</p>

<p>“Did you happen to tell her <i>why</i> you had
arrested her?”</p>

<p>“No, not a word.”</p>

<p>“That’s right. Wait in the next room.”</p>

<p>Wenk interviewed others, and finally the assistant-editor
arrived. He protested loudly against
this high-handed action of the authorities, and said
that his newspaper....</p>

<p>“If it is the duty of your newspaper to serve
its readers up the latest scandal, whether it be
a murder or the unlucky ending of a love-affair,
merely because it is a scandal, in as hasty and
disconnected a fashion as it was reported to you
... you would be right to protest. But you
have no right to hinder the authorities whose
duty it is to deal with infinitely more important<span class="pagenum" id="Page_124">[124]</span>
matters so that you may satisfy fools with a
thirst for gossip.”</p>

<p>“But,” stammered the editor, in an excited tone,
“but you are trying to stifle the Press. We are
not living under the old system, you know. The
Republic will....”</p>

<p>“I have no time to bother about what the
Republic will do. Be so good as to give me the
letter you telephoned me about!”</p>

<p>“I am sorry,” said the editor, with a confident
and self-satisfied air. “These are Press secrets.”</p>

<p>“Pardon my saying so, editor, but you really
are very foolish. I respect any Press secrets
which protect the interests of the community, but
your refusal to give me this letter only injures
them. Before I take it from you by force (an
action which would lay you open to a penalty
for resisting the law), I will tell you that this
letter is the only piece of evidence we have at
present of an unusually serious crime. Perhaps
then you will become more reasonable, and not
entrench yourself behind the plea of your professional
duty, which, as I have already stated, I
do recognize, though I place it far below the
interests which I represent.”</p>

<p>Grube felt uncertain how to act. Finally he
brought out the document, saying, “I deliver it
under protest, and....”</p>

<p>“Did you see anything of the man who brought
it? Could you recognize him?”</p>

<p>“There was very little light on the street from
my window. I could only see that he was well
dressed, and he certainly wore an opera hat. A
little while after he had disappeared from sight,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_125">[125]</span>
I heard a car drive off in the direction he took
on leaving our office, and I imagine it was his.”</p>

<p>“Herr Grube, you will be so kind as to leave
this letter in my hands. You will be an important
witness in one of the most notable criminal prosecutions
of recent years. I beg you, upon your
honour, to preserve absolute silence about this
letter and everything connected with it.”</p>

<p>Grube, under the spell of the horror which
had seized upon him, now became more pliable,
and grew as eager about the affair as he had
previously been obdurate. He handed over the
document, exclaiming, “There it is then! I am
quite at your service. That is a very different
matter!”</p>

<p>“My car will take you back to your office
again. Please leave word that I am anxious to
see the editor-in-chief as soon as he is able to
attend upon me.”</p>

<p>The assistant-editor withdrew.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_126">[126]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">VIII</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Wenk</span> remained alone, inwardly cool. He had
been able to suppress the horror and dread which
the crime had excited in his sensitive and sympathetic
soul. He knew the reason underlying
this murder. It was not revenge, but something
far more dangerous and deadly. It was terrorization!
That was revealed to him by the letter
to the news agency, designed to give information
about the murder other than the police reports.
It was the terrorizing of all who felt themselves
victims of that fair-bearded stranger who had
appeared among them. How much this gambler
must have at stake, he thought, that he could thus
personally announce his crime, to give the affair
the turn he wanted it to have! How many people
were in his pay that he was able to carry out
his criminal deeds in this fashion? What sort
of people were they, and what was the example
such conduct would afford to those who were still
hovering undecidedly between good and evil?
How many adherents might not the announcement
of this deed yet secure for him?</p>

<p>Hull had met his fate because he had revealed
to the authorities, in the person of Wenk, the
history of the I O U, and because the pseudo
Herr Balling desired thus to give an example of<span class="pagenum" id="Page_127">[127]</span>
what would occur to those who stood in his way.
Possibly, even probably, the attack had also been
directed at himself, and he had only escaped
because his indignation had driven him from the
place.</p>

<p>Now perhaps it would be impossible, for
strategical reasons, to close down the “Go-ahead”
Institute.... Like so many similar places, it
might serve as a trap.</p>

<p>“And what about Cara Carozza?” he said to
himself. “Shall I be able to get her to confess
for whom she was acting as a decoy? What can
she confess, and whose name would she reveal?
Even if a name and possibly an address be
furnished me, do I know the man’s secrets, and
what precautions he has taken against me? No,
I will not go to see this girl. I will leave her
in custody and let her wait.... Then she will
realize that there’s trouble ahead of her. She is
weak and vicious; perhaps she will give in of
her own accord.”</p>

<p>Finally, however, Wenk decided otherwise. He
would take the exactly opposite course. He would
lull her suspicions by a friendly and sympathetic
bearing. She was crafty, but she belonged to
the theatrical world, and by his assumed friendliness
and sympathy with her in the circumstances
leading to her arrest he might make her more
ready to confide in him. He therefore went at
once to the guard-room, where he found her seated
in a small compartment. Wenk hastened towards
her.</p>

<p>“But, my dear young lady,” he exclaimed,
“how came you here? What have they been<span class="pagenum" id="Page_128">[128]</span>
doing to you? They have just rung up to tell
me what has happened. What a good thing you
thought of me!”</p>

<p>“Oh, Herr Wenk, you come as an angel of
light to me in my dungeon. Let us get away
from this place at once! Don’t lose an instant! I
am stifling here. I can’t breathe in these horrible
surroundings.” She hastened towards the door.</p>

<p>“Ah, but now I must prepare you for a
disappointment, which is unavoidable. You see,
my dear young lady, we live under the State,
and every State has supreme power. It appoints
officials, each of whom carries on his own peculiar
office, and they cannot encroach upon the domains
of others. The State has appointed me one of its
Attorneys, but I am only there to prosecute
offenders, not to set innocent people free.”</p>

<p>“Then what’s to happen to me?” said Cara,
suddenly hardening her attitude.</p>

<p>Her tone warned Wenk, and he came at once
to the point:</p>

<p>“Your case does not come under my jurisdiction
first of all, but that of the court of inquiry,
and you are bound to undergo an examination
there. It is troublesome, no doubt, but you must
blame the circumstances for that.”</p>

<p>“And what about your part in it?” asked the
girl.</p>

<p>“Mine? I can do nothing but tell the examining
counsel that we are old acquaintances,
and that I do not think you capable of taking
any part in such a crime.”</p>

<p>“Then why did you come here? You are not
the examining counsel.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_129">[129]</span>Wenk realized then that she had seen through
his ruse, and he knew, too, that she had escaped
the snare, but at the same time he was convinced
that she was guilty.</p>

<p>“I came here on account of a minor circumstance
in which I can help you,” he said quickly.
“I understand that you resisted the constables?”</p>

<p>“What woman would allow herself to be
attacked by coarse brutes of constables without
resisting?”</p>

<p>“Yes, of course; it was the circumstances
which were to blame for your behaving unreflectingly
and forcing them to do their duty.”</p>

<p>“I am well known as an artiste. My name
ought to have been enough for them!”</p>

<p>“Did you give the constables your name?”</p>

<p>“Certainly I did, straight away!”</p>

<p>“It is strange that they should not have told
me that. They mentioned another name that you
had called out!”</p>

<p>Then Wenk observed that Cara threw a hasty
and searching glance, full of hate, upon him.
She looked away again at once, and drummed with
her fingers on her knee.</p>

<p>“They said another name, did they? That’s
curious, for my own name is well enough known,
and thought enough of. What might this other
strange name have been?”</p>

<p>“The constable said it was George.”</p>

<p>Her face showed no change when Wenk said
that.</p>

<p>“He couldn’t have heard properly, for my
name, as you know, isn’t George,” she said, with
an air of indifference.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_130">[130]</span>“But a second constable says he heard you
give the same name. It really <i>was</i> George!”</p>

<p>“How strange!” said Cara, after a pause for
reflection. “My husband’s name was George.
Could I, in my excitement, have called....”</p>

<p>“Ah, now everything is perfectly clear. That
is quite comprehensible, but, of course, nobody
knew you had been married?”</p>

<p>“I <i>am</i> married!”</p>

<p>“You still are; oh, that’s something different.
Shall I send word to your husband? But perhaps
you no longer hold any intercourse with him?”</p>

<p>“Indeed I do! His address is 234, Eschenheimerstrasse,
Frankfurt-am-Main.... His name
is George Strümpfli.”</p>

<p>“This will be painful news for him. Are you
not afraid that there may be some difficulty when
he hears your name connected with the circumstance
of Hull’s murder?”</p>

<p>Then Cara spoke at last, falling back on her
chair. “Hull murdered!...” she exclaimed,
and she sank fainting from the chair to the
ground.</p>

<p>For the moment Wenk was taken aback; then
he decided that this fainting-fit was assumed.
He raised her on to the couch, then went away
without attending to her further. Going out, he
ordered the constables to keep a sharp eye on
the lady, and not let anyone at all go into the
ante-room. They were to keep their weapons
fixed.</p>

<p>He drove back to the central police-station and
informed the divisional surgeon, requesting him
to drive to the guard-room, and to search the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_131">[131]</span>
girl’s clothing without exciting suspicion. He
then wrote out the order for her arrest, and handed
it over. He gave orders at the Police Information
Bureau that any journalist who came seeking
for news was to be sent to him direct.</p>

<p>By this time it was daylight. Wenk had a
bath and then drove to the office of the Central
News Agency, the editor-in-chief of which had
rung him up on the telephone.</p>

<p>When Wenk had told him all that had occurred,
he said: “The reason that emboldened me to
lay claim to some of your time, was this. If it
were an isolated murder I would, although unwillingly,
let the reporting of it proceed in the
usual manner. But behind this assault we are
confronted by a gang having at their head a man
of apparently enormous and comprehensive powers.
He must have secured to himself an organized
set of followers whose only aim is to guard him
while he carries out his crimes. The letter, which
he himself may have handed into your office,
discloses the fact that he desires the affair to be
made known in the way that suits his ends. He
means it as a warning. The victim himself told
me not long ago that he had come across him
in very peculiar circumstances, and this he knew.
It is his aim to surround his dark deeds by a
wall of dread; folks are to realize that no one
who makes any attempt against <i>him</i> can escape
with his life. You can readily see how great a
danger such a man is; at a time when the war
has left folks weak and emotional on the one
hand and more readily incited to evil on the
other. We cannot altogether suppress such an<span class="pagenum" id="Page_132">[132]</span>
occurrence as this, but I desire that it should be
announced apart from the connecting circumstances
known to me, so that the imagination may not
make popular heroes out of murderers. In this
I am counting on the assistance of yourself and
your colleagues. May I beg you most earnestly
not to make known <i>anything</i> concerning the Hull
affair which has not first been seen by me? We
are living in an age of mental and spiritual
epidemics, and those who would help to bring
healing must be prepared to sacrifice themselves.”</p>

<p>“I will certainly act as you desire,” said the
editor-in-chief.</p>

<p>“At the same time,” Wenk went on, “I
wouldn’t on any account allow the impression to
get about that such a course is due to more
complete knowledge of the circumstances, or the
exercise of authority on the part of the law, you
understand.”</p>

<p>“I quite follow you there,” said the sympathetic
editor.</p>

<p>“Then I am grateful to you, and can only hope
for good results from our combined efforts. Our
nation is in evil case.”</p>

<p>When he got home Wenk was anxious to go
to bed and enjoy a few hours of much-needed
rest. It was already ten o’clock, but just then
his chauffeur, who acted as his personal attendant,
brought him a visiting-card bearing the name of
Countess Told.</p>

<p>“I am quite disengaged,” said Wenk immediately,
and the Countess was ushered in.</p>

<p>“Is there any possibility of our being interrupted
here by an anxious wife who is not <i>au<span class="pagenum" id="Page_133">[133]</span>
courant</i> of the matter which is engaging our
attention?” she asked, as she gave Wenk her
slender hand cordially.</p>

<p>“The happiness of possessing a partner for life
has never been mine!” answered Wenk, feeling
a delicious sweetness in the proximity of this
woman. And yet she stood before him as something
dreamlike, connected with a life which he
seemed to have led not long before. Between
this hour and that lay the mysterious occurrences
of the night, and he was unable to conceive
that these feelings of love and longing could be
actually real.</p>

<p>She stood before him, and he found no word
to say to her, while she herself, insensibly influenced
by the man’s force of character and lofty
aims, felt embarrassed by this silence, because
it seemed to be a confirmation of her own sensations.
“Yes,” she confessed to herself, “the
feeling I have for him is ...,” but she would
not utter the word “love.” She blushed at the
thought, a blush which Wenk saw. A tremor
passed through him, and he struggled with himself
as he bent low over her hand.</p>

<p>Then suddenly the vision of the murdered man
rose before him, and he no longer felt bold enough
to betray by word or gesture the infatuation which
possessed him. He offered the Countess a chair,
and while he fetched another for himself his
imagination was fired by an idea which afforded
a solution of the conflict waging within him. This
woman, whom he loved and to whom he was
evidently not wholly indifferent, should be associated
with him in his undertaking, and their<span class="pagenum" id="Page_134">[134]</span>
common endeavour might bring about their own
harvest. Then he said to her seriously:</p>

<p>“During this last night an acquaintance known
to both of us, Edgar von Hull, has been murdered.
His friend Karstens is severely wounded,
and I only escaped because I had happened to
leave, two hours earlier, the locality into which
we had been enticed. I believe I know the
instigator of this crime. It is once more the
sandy-bearded man and the old Professor. Its
actual perpetrators have escaped, but we have
made one arrest, of a person who is also known
to you. I mean Cara Carozza, the dancer, whose
liaison with Hull you are aware of. At present
I have hardly more than a profound conviction
that she has had some share in the crime, but
I have thought of a way by which we might loosen
her tongue. If you, Countess, would undertake
the unpleasant enterprise of allowing yourself to be
arrested, I would take care to arrange for your
being put into the same cell as Carozza. She
does not know you as Countess Told, but as a
lady who frequents her own circles. Represent
your offence as a very trifling one, and say that
you will soon be set free, even if you are found
guilty of taking part in an illicit game....
Promise to help her, perhaps by flight ... and
you must previously have informed her that her
situation is a very serious one, and one never
can tell what may happen to persons arrested
in such circumstances as hers.... She will then
probably tell you who would be able to arrange
for her escape, and you understand the rest,
Countess. Are you willing to play the part?”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_135">[135]</span>“I will carry out your wishes,” said the
Countess, without stopping an instant for reflection,
and her voice sounded eager.</p>

<p>Wenk was sensibly touched by the haste, the
ready zeal with which this gracious and beautiful
woman accepted his suggestion.</p>

<p>“Up to now,” she said lightly, “there has
never been a chance for me to do anything really
useful, to engage in a bold enterprise with life
at stake, to study life at first hand.”</p>

<p>“And that is what you have been seeking in
the gambling-dens?” he asked.</p>

<p>“I do not rightly know. I felt at home in
those places, because there seemed to be no
barriers. In my own circle I could perceive the
horizon everywhere, and I could not endure that.
I feel I owe you much....”</p>

<p>There was a smarting in Wenk’s eyes. He
was overcome with a sensation of longing; it
took possession of him and tormented him, and
he asked, almost roughly, “And your husband?”</p>

<p>She answered calmly, “In every marriage,
although you cannot know it by experience, there
is something of what the heart has sought left
unfulfilled. I rob my husband of nothing, if I
try to find what I am seeking without him.”</p>

<p>“I honour and esteem you,” cried Wenk, his
voice trembling slightly.</p>

<p>“It is nothing but the natural law,” she countered;
“and now tell me what I am to do.”</p>

<p>“On a certain day, which you shall appoint, I
will take you in my car to the governor of the
prison and we will arrange everything with him.
When would it suit you?”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_136">[136]</span>“Next Saturday at this time.” She rose.</p>

<p>“The grey prison walls will begin to shine!”
said Wenk.</p>

<p>“Because of such odd proceedings,” laughed
she.</p>

<p>“No, Countess, your beauty will light them
up,” and Wenk suddenly felt as if he loved her
with a passion which must be shining in his
eyes. He bent so low over her hand in adieu
that he concealed his face from her, and she
yielded it to him in a gracious gesture that was
almost like the confession of a mutual understanding
between them, then hastened away.</p>

<p>Out in the street the blood mounted to her
cheeks, and half unconsciously she murmured the
word she had suppressed, “love ... love,” while
in Wenk’s room there remained a scent of her
which he eagerly inhaled. Then pressing both
hands to his face, and indulging his secret and
mysterious presentiments, he whispered ardently
into the darkness that concealed his vision,
“Death and love ... death and love!”</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>In the course of the day the report of the
murder ran through the city. It arose from the
dark quarter where Hull had yielded up his useless
and trivial existence. A dark patch remained
there, and the pavement was coloured with the
blood that had been shed. The thaw had made
the gutters moist and muddy, and they had sucked
in the dark evidences of the crime, till from a
mere patch it became a monster, reaching from
its own narrow corner to spread throughout the
town. Folks came to seek its source, drinking<span class="pagenum" id="Page_137">[137]</span>
in on the spot the full horrors of the deed.
They saw the monster rear its head, rush towards
them and through them, leaving disorder, abuse
and dread in its wake. Like a dragon it wound
itself through the alleys to the broad Ludwigstrasse,
crept through the squares to the very
heart of the city, and began to overflow all
quarters, to escape from the streets to the houses.
Like an underground drain it ran all day long,
its gloomy current and dismal stench striking
terror into men’s hearts or drawing thence a force
which could but find its outlet in evil.</p>

<p>Three days later a woman of the streets was
murdered in the night, and the assassin was caught
the very next day. He was an “out-of-work,”
one of those relics of war-time, who had fallen
into a state approaching savagery. He confessed
that he did not know what he was doing when
he pressed his fingers deep into the girl’s throat.
Something seemed to seize upon him in the dark
when he came round that corner by the Jägerstrasse,
and drove him to do it.</p>

<p>The town was enveloped as in a misty fog, impressionable
and passionate as the human heart,
and the spring beyond it was obscured. The
lights thrown on life became glaring, its shadows
of a wild and overwhelming blackness. Men’s
hearts were torn in two, and everywhere there
was internal conflict.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_138">[138]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">IX</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">At</span> four o’clock there was a telephone call from
Frankfurt. “George Strümpfli, artist, was born
in Basle in 1885, and lived at the address indicated
from January 1st to December 10th last
year. He has now gone abroad, his whereabouts
being unknown. In the records he is entered as of
Swiss nationality, and he is a married man.”</p>

<p>From the register of the town inhabitants Wenk
learnt that Cara Carozza was described as follows:
“Maria Strümpfli, formerly Essert, known as Cara
Carozza, dancer, born in Brunn, May 1, 1892,
arrived in Munich from Copenhagen.”</p>

<p>Wenk wondered how the pronunciation of
“Georsh” instead of George could have arisen,
for both these people were South Germans by
speech, and “Georsh” was only heard in North
Germany.</p>

<p>He went again to see the dancer, who was
now in a prison cell.</p>

<p>“I don’t want anything to do with you,” she
said in a harsh voice to Wenk. “You say you
are going to help me, and yet you put me in
prison.”</p>

<p>“It was not I: that is a mistake on your
part. It is the examining counsel, as I told you
at once. I am only here to clear up one difficulty<span class="pagenum" id="Page_139">[139]</span>
in the case, and that is the name you called out.
That is the point at issue.”</p>

<p>“Indeed! you seem rather concerned about
the verdict.”</p>

<p>“Yes, of course we are. If you were prepared
to help us we might get over the difficulty. Let
me see, you said your husband’s name was Carl
... Carl Strümpfli, wasn’t it?”</p>

<p>“In case you forget it again, his name is
George.”</p>

<p>“He is a Swiss?”</p>

<p>“You have evidently been inquiring about him.”</p>

<p>“Certainly,” said Wenk. “And so he is called
George. Now tell me, although you may think
it a foolish question, had you any special name
for him?”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“You never called him anything but....”</p>

<p>“George. No, only George. When can I get
away from here?”</p>

<p>“Ah, that depends upon the examining counsel.”</p>

<p>“Well then, he ought to be here. It is shameful
that a well-known artiste like me should....”</p>

<p>“You see, unfortunately everything must take
its prescribed course. ‘Without respect of individuals,’
as the legal phrase runs. I cannot
promise you any more than my own help.”</p>

<p>“You are going away again? And without
me?”</p>

<p>“For the moment I cannot do anything else.”</p>

<p>The dancer turned away.</p>

<p>Wenk went to the scene of the crime. He had
previously studied the list of those living in its
vicinity, and especially those in the Finkenstrasse.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_140">[140]</span>
He took two plain-clothes policemen with him,
one of them being the constable who had pursued
the criminals as far as the park wall. They
examined the wall by daylight; it showed scratches
from the tips of shoes, and on the top was a
trace of blood. Possibly someone had been lifted
up who grasped the top with his hands. In the
clear February day the light fell pitilessly on
that trace of the murdered Hull.</p>

<p>Wenk entered the houses, many of which, he
perceived, led at the back to the park. He spoke
to all their occupants separately. Some had
heard a noise in the night, but they did not
consider that anything unusual, and in the houses
themselves, as they told Wenk, they had heard
nothing.</p>

<p>He examined the park on the other side of
the wall. There was nothing to be seen there
beyond a trace of many footprints in one spot,
where they had apparently jumped down, for some
of the impressions were fairly deep. But this
spot had been raked, and carbolic acid thrown
upon it. There was an empty tin near, which
from its smell had evidently contained carbolic.
This precaution was doubtless taken in case the
police hounds should be requisitioned, and it might
have been put there beforehand, but he did not
quite understand the reason, and decided to test
it by means of a hound. It took up the scent
in the Jägerstrasse, ran to the wall and jumped
up on it, but when they lifted it on the other side
it went no further. It turned away in disgust at
the smell of the carbolic, ran up and down the
wall and then back again, always in the same<span class="pagenum" id="Page_141">[141]</span>
direction, and yet always as if irresolute. It tried
to spring into the air.</p>

<p>Wenk had it lifted over the wall again, but
when the hound was on the top, and the man on
the other side ready to receive it, it escaped from
him and ran, barking furiously, along the top.
It did not run far, but remained in one spot,
barking, with its head downwards, towards the yard
of one of the houses, trying to jump down there.
Then with one spring the hound was over, running
towards the house, where it stood still at the outer
wall. This Wenk examined closely, perceiving
marks of scratches occurring at regular intervals
upwards. Here undoubtedly people had climbed
up by means of a ladder, and the tracks led to
a window on the first floor. The room it belonged
to was empty, and he asked the people
of the house how long it had been so. Then all
the other lodgers were astonished, for they said
it was occupied. One of them exclaimed, “But
Georsh is living there!”</p>

<p>Wenk’s heart gave a sudden leap.</p>

<p>“Who?” he said quickly. “What was his
name?”</p>

<p>Again the answer was “Georsh.”</p>

<p>“Did you know him?” he asked of one woman.</p>

<p>“Certainly I knew Georsh!” she replied.</p>

<p>“Was that his surname?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know.”</p>

<p>“Who used to call him that?”</p>

<p>“The fellows who were always coming to see
him.”</p>

<p>“So his name was George?” went on Wenk,
desirous of being quite certain.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_142">[142]</span>“No, he was called Georsh,” answered one of
them.</p>

<p>“Has he lived here long?”</p>

<p>Nobody knew exactly; some thought it was
about a year, but he was hardly ever at home.
He tried to get a description of the man, but
then a curious fact came to light. Even about
the colour of his hair they could not agree. One
said he was blue-eyed, another declared his eyes
were dark. He was rather tall and thin, and
dressed like a sailor. Again, he looked rather
like an athlete.</p>

<p>“What was he then? What was his calling?”</p>

<p>“They said he was a commercial traveller.”</p>

<p>It was curious that there was no mention of
this Georsh as an occupant of the house; he
was not on the list given to Wenk.</p>

<p>Wenk went to the Town Register Office, and
with the help of the officials he ascertained that
one occupant of the house had been a George
Hinrichsen from the Elbe district. He had left
the place about a month before, and said he was
going to Ravensburg, and after that the room
had been taken by a commercial traveller named
Poldringer.</p>

<p>It was quite clear to Wenk that Hinrichsen
and Poldringer the traveller were one and the
same person. It was just a month ago that Hull
had had that memorable conversation with Wenk.
And Hinrichsen and Poldringer were the same
individual as the murderer of Hull, or at least the
person who directed the murder, and it was his
name that the dancer had called out. Possibly
the direction Hinrichsen had taken in departure<span class="pagenum" id="Page_143">[143]</span>
also agreed with this, for Constance lay near
Ravensburg, and Switzerland could be reached
from there.</p>

<p>Wenk telegraphed to the Constance head-office,
with special reference to the passport stations.
A few hours later the police officials there telegraphed
back that a man named Poldringer had
notified his arrival there. He gave Bavaria as
his native State, and this had struck the registering
official as curious, because the man used a dialect
that was unmistakably North German. On that
account the police kept him under surveillance.
They ascertained that he frequented the society
of people who were suspected of smuggling goods
across the Swiss frontier. He often travelled by
the steamer to Lindau. “Expect me to-day in
Constance,” telephoned Wenk finally.</p>

<p>Wenk immediately prepared for a journey. He
could reach Constance before night if the little
monoplane belonging to a friend of his, which
was always at his service, were ready for a flight.
He telephoned to him and ascertained that it was.</p>

<p>At four o’clock he departed, and in the
deepening twilight he descended at the Petershaus
aerodrome near Constance. The police described
the locality in which these profiteers and smugglers
were to be found. He disguised himself as a
chauffeur and went to one of their inns to get
some supper. He addressed one man whom he
thought to be of their party, saying that he could
get hold of two cars, and also some sort of export
licence, as long as it wasn’t looked at too closely,
but if he had the help of one or, better still, of
two bold fellows it could be done quite easily.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_144">[144]</span>
There would be a profit of about ten thousand
in it, for the cars were bought in the autumn of
1918 and had been kept hidden ever since. They
were first-class cars that had belonged to two
generals.</p>

<p>The other did not take long to consider. He
would broach the matter to a friend of his, and
the three of them would soon pull it off. They
went together later to another tavern, which the
friend often frequented, but he did not appear.</p>

<p>“What is his name?” asked Wenk. “Perhaps
I know him.”</p>

<p>“He is called Ball, but you may have known
him under some other name. Most of us find
it convenient to have one or two different names
here; you know all about that, don’t you?”</p>

<p>“Of course I do,” said Wenk.</p>

<p>Then he grew suddenly pale, for just then a
man entered, in whom he thought he recognized
the chauffeur who had driven him to Schleissheim
in the car filled with poison gas. Everything
was at stake. Wenk’s disguise was rather a
sketchy one. Supposing this man were the Ball
they were expecting! If he came to their table
and sat down, he would probably recognize Wenk,
and the whole story would come out. He employed
all his powers to regain his self-control,
and tried to disguise his features by contracting
his facial muscles. He had already taken the
precaution of seating himself in a dark corner.</p>

<p>But the new-comer sat down at some distance
from him at a large table where several young
fellows were already sitting. He had his back
to Wenk, but the lawyer felt he must not venture<span class="pagenum" id="Page_145">[145]</span>
any further, and promising a rendezvous for the
next evening, he hastily took his leave.</p>

<p>He went to the police-station, stated where he
had been, and described the suspected man. The
sergeant of police sent for a constable, who said
that according to the description the man must
be Poldringer.</p>

<p>“Could we be certain of that? I should like
the fact established during the night. But I beg
of you to proceed cautiously in the matter, for
this man is armed at all points!” urged Wenk.</p>

<p>Then he thought it would be better not to go
there, said the constable. It was but a small
town, and all the police officials, even the plain-clothes
men, knew these profiteers. His sudden
appearance might give the alarm.</p>

<p>“Well then, I must manage without that. Do
you know where he lives?”</p>

<p>“Certainly.”</p>

<p>“Then take me there at once.”</p>

<p>The sergeant took Wenk to a byway where
stood a shabby old inn, which was divided into
many courtyards at the back. Wenk at once
recognized that it would be extremely difficult to
carry through any arrest here without a large
body of police, and so many constables could not
be quickly and easily procured in a small town
like this.</p>

<p>Opposite the house was an iron-foundry. Here
Wenk spent the next forenoon in company with
a constable who knew Poldringer, the two concealing
themselves behind a dust-begrimed window.</p>

<p>When, about eleven o’clock, the man whom
Wenk knew as the sandy-bearded man’s chauffeur<span class="pagenum" id="Page_146">[146]</span>
came out of the house, the constable nudged him,
saying, “That is Poldringer!”</p>

<p>“That’s my man!” said Wenk.</p>

<p>In the afternoon he had a consultation with
the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.
Wenk said it was not a case of arresting one man,
but of getting rid of the whole gang, for here
in Constance, as one might say, there was but
one division of the army whose general headquarters
was in Munich, and until one could lay
hold of the leader it was not worth while to
secure a dozen or so of his accomplices. Wenk
advised their not making use of the announcement
of a reward of five-thousand marks for information
(which had been drawn up contrary to his
wish), but rather that they should keep a close
watch upon what they now knew to be one of
the haunts of the gang. That would be the safest
way of entrapping their leader, for if they seized
the chauffeur now, his master would receive
emphatic warning. And this man, Wenk told
them, was undoubtedly one of the most daring
criminals to be met with in the last ten years.
It was not only a money reward, but fame, that
might be looked for, and the constables all
promised to do what they could.</p>

<p>In the evening Wenk met the young man who
was going to help him get rid of the cars at a
big profit. His friend had left the town, he
said, for things had gone badly of late. Switzerland
was overdone with German goods, and the
German authorities seemed to be regaining their
control of the Lake. They might soon be starving,
he said. But <i>he</i> knew what to do. He wasn’t<span class="pagenum" id="Page_147">[147]</span>
going to starve, and sooner than be driven out
of the place by hunger, he would join the Foreign
Legion. Then at least he would be safe from the
German authorities. He could fill his belly in
peace, and if he were shot down it would be as a
free man, whereas if he stayed here he was bound
to end in quod.</p>

<p>Wenk asked what he had to do to get into
the Foreign Legion.</p>

<p>“Oh, that’s easier than ever it was,” answered
the man. “Before the war you had to go to
Belfort, but now that’s not necessary—you can
join up here.”</p>

<p>“Well, that’s a good thing to know. What’s
the address of their headquarters?”</p>

<p>“Oh, you only need go to the ‘Black Bull’
and ask for Poldringer, or else come in the
evening to the tavern we went to yesterday, for
he was sitting there. He had got a lot of them
at his table, and I told him I’d think it over.
If our honk-honk business comes off, I shan’t
need to, though, but we can’t get hold of that
d——d Ball; he’d want to stand in with us, but
I expect he’s got something good on somewhere
else. By the way, Poldringer was asking after
you last night. You must belong to his part of the
country, eh? He said he thought he knew you,
but I told him you were from Basle and wanted
to get two cars across, and he said, ‘Oh, then
it can’t be the man from Munich,’ but I thought
to myself a man might have been in Munich and
yet be in Basle now, eh, mate?”</p>

<p>“I’ve never been in Munich,” said Wenk; “he
must have mistaken me for someone else.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_148">[148]</span>“Well, it’s all the same thing, anyhow! We’ll
get those cars through, eh? By the way, can
you stand me a trifle of ready on the job?”</p>

<p>“A fifty?” asked Wenk.</p>

<p>“Oh well, if it’s not inconvenient, I’d like two
fifties.”</p>

<p>“One’s all I can spare at the moment,” said
Wenk, pulling a fifty-mark note out of his waistcoat-pocket.</p>

<p>“You needn’t be afraid of showing your
purse, even if it has a hole in it,” remarked the
man.</p>

<p>“You wouldn’t buy any more with fifty out
of my purse than you can with that one!”</p>

<p>“Well, all right; no offence! Where are you
staying?”</p>

<p>“In Barbarossa,” said Wenk, at a venture.</p>

<p>“Oh, if the folks there get hold of you, you
won’t get out of their clutches, I can tell you!
You go to the ‘Black Bull.’ They’ll look after
you properly there, and everything is arranged
so that you can fly off as easily as these greenbacks
will. Not a trace left behind!”</p>

<p>Next morning Wenk flew back to Munich. His
trip had been successful, and the journey in the
pure clean air, cold though it was in the upper
regions, invigorated him. He felt as if he were
gathering the threads together in his hand and
they were about to form a vast and invisible net,
and he, the fisherman, felt himself ready and
able to drag it in.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>An hour before Wenk took up his stand at
the grimy window of the iron-foundry opposite<span class="pagenum" id="Page_149">[149]</span>
the “Black Bull,” the following conversation was
carried on between Constance and Munich:</p>

<p>“Hulloa, Dr. Dringer speaking. Who is
there?”</p>

<p>“Hulloa, this is Dr. Mabuse. What is it,
please?”</p>

<p>“The invalid seems to be staying here. I am
not quite certain yet that it is he, but I thought
I recognized him. I am anxious for instructions.”</p>

<p>“That’s very strange. He was in Munich to
my certain knowledge just about four o’clock
yesterday. What time did you think you saw
him, Doctor?”</p>

<p>“At half-past seven!”</p>

<p>“But the express does not leave until 7 p.m.
and only reaches Lindau at 11 p.m. Even if
he had used a car he could not possibly have
reached Constance by half-past seven!”</p>

<p>“It is possible that I may have been mistaken,
but hardly likely. I can’t at once abandon the
idea that it was the lunatic we are searching for.”</p>

<p>“Well, in any case, my dear colleague, prosecute
your inquiries, and if you are convinced, use the
safest means at your command.”</p>

<p>“You mean the strait-waistcoat, Doctor?”</p>

<p>“Certainly, for you know he is dangerous to
the community. Have you any other news?
What about those neurotic patients?”</p>

<p>“They are quite ready to go to the sanatorium,
and they start to-morrow.”</p>

<p>“Good. That’s all, thank you. My best wishes
to you, Doctor.”</p>

<p>Mabuse went up and down his room in considerable
excitement. How could it be possible<span class="pagenum" id="Page_150">[150]</span>
that the State Attorney, who was still in
Munich at 4 p.m. should have been seen in
Constance at 7.30 p.m.? Might not George be
mistaken?</p>

<p>He dressed himself as a messenger and repaired
to the Amandastrasse, where Wenk had
his chambers. He rang his door-bell, and a
servant opened to him.</p>

<p>“Can I see the State Attorney?” he asked.</p>

<p>“He is not at home. Give me the letter.”</p>

<p>“I was to give it to him personally.... When
will he be back?”</p>

<p>“I do not know.”</p>

<p>“Has he gone away for long, or shall I be
able to hand him the letter this afternoon?”</p>

<p>“His honour did not leave word.”</p>

<p>“Ah, then I must rely on you,” said the
messenger. “You will be sure to deliver the letter,
won’t you?”</p>

<p>“Certainly, give it here,” and the man glanced
at the address, but it was directed to the State
Attorney, Dr. Müller, and he said, “You are
making a mistake. Herr von Wenk is the barrister
who lives here.”</p>

<p>“Good heavens, so they’ve given me the wrong
number! I always say, ‘Write it down, gentlemen.’
And so I’ve made a mistake here. Where
does the gentleman I want live?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know him at all.”</p>

<p>“Well, there’s nothing for it but to go back!
Good morning!”</p>

<p>The pseudo-messenger went off, knowing only
half he wanted to know. On the way, enlightenment
came to him. “Of course,” he said to himself,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_151">[151]</span>
“he must have gone by aeroplane, and I can
guess why....”</p>

<p>For an instant a mist swam before his eyes,
so acutely did he feel this discovery of his. For
the first time he measured his adversary’s powers.
No one had ever used such means against him before.
George had not yet sent off the discharged
smugglers. Were they the reason of this hasty
visit to Constance? Had his—Mabuse’s—band of
watchers failed him? The matter became more
difficult and dangerous every day, and recently
several agents of the Foreign Legion had been
discovered and arrested.</p>

<p>“If Wenk has the whole gang imprisoned,”
thought Mabuse, “one of them might blab enough
to bring the inquiry home to me, and then for
the first time I shall no longer be safe. I must
have him got out of the way.... Why did
George let him go, if he had even a suspicion
that it might be the lawyer? A plague upon
the soft-heartedness that allowed him to escape us
at Schleissheim! My life is not safe until he is
wiped out of existence! I shall have to prepare
for flight, and I will be off to the Swiss frontier
unless I know for certain by eight o’clock to-night
whether George is arrested or not. Where
did George see him? If I only knew that, for
it all depends upon that! I am consumed with
impatience, and my hatred of this destroyer of
my peace is burning me like a fever. Supposing
I never reach my kingdom of Citopomar!”</p>

<p>Then Mabuse went home again, carrying a
parcel for himself under his arm. He must be
prepared for all eventualities. Should his dwelling<span class="pagenum" id="Page_152">[152]</span>
be already secretly watched by the police, he was
a messenger who had something to deliver,
and there were cigars in the parcel. But his
chambers were empty, and there was nothing
suspicious in the neighbourhood.</p>

<p>That evening he did not leave his house again.
It was safer for him to see from the window
who was coming to him than to find, on returning
after absence, that someone had effected an entry
and was watching at the window for him. He
must be ready for anything that might happen!</p>

<p>He spent the evening in examining his finances.
There was yet six months’ work to be accomplished
in Germany before he had the amount he had
decided would be necessary. There he knew the
ground well, and anywhere else it would take
at least a year to accomplish the same result.
The languages he was conversant with necessitated
his being in countries where German and English
were known. Six months! The words throbbed
in his brain, and the blood mounted to his heart.
“I shall stay!” he said aloud in his lonely
room, and it seemed as if the defiance these words
awoke rang through him like the blow of the
hammer on the anvil.</p>

<p>Next morning at half-past seven there was an
urgent telephone call from Constance. “Doctor
Dringer speaking! I am sorry, but I fear I
have misled my esteemed colleague. There is
no further trace to be seen. Everything is in
readiness for departure, and the other patients
are prepared for their journey.”</p>

<p>“It was a pity, Doctor. Ring up again this
evening!”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_153">[153]</span>“You swine!” Mabuse growled between his
teeth at his window, looking in the direction of
Wenk’s chambers. “If it were only for this half-hour
of uncertainty, you should pay for it with
your life! The first attempt failed through a
mere accident. There shall be no accident the
next time!”</p>

<p>Mabuse left his house on foot, went to one of
the fashionable hotels, and asked for the general
manager, Herr Hungerbühler. Yes, he was there,
and would be found in Room 115, he was
told.</p>

<p>When Mabuse entered the room unannounced,
it was empty. “Spoerri!” he called softly.
Then a cupboard door opened and Spoerri came
out.</p>

<p>“Wenk seems to be in Constance. George
has just telephoned to me. Look after the matter.
How is Cara getting on in prison?”</p>

<p>“It would be safer if she were out of the way
altogether. Dead men tell no tales!”</p>

<p>“No, I have already told you once, she is
safer alive than dead,” answered Mabuse quickly.</p>

<p>“In any case, I have got one of the warders
under my control.”</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>“To contrive her escape, if she’s to be allowed
to live!”</p>

<p>“Fool!” cried Mabuse angrily. “I tell you
she is safer where she is. If they were to break
open her mouth with a crowbar she would never
say anything. Stop talking such d——d nonsense.
She is to come out when I leave Europe, not
before! I came to tell you that I give you a<span class="pagenum" id="Page_154">[154]</span>
month to get rid of Wenk. I make it so long,
so that it may be safely undertaken. Make a
note of the date, for he’s not to live a day longer
than that!” and Mabuse went off, without a word
of farewell.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_155">[155]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">X</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Next</span> evening Dr. Mabuse was invited to spend
the evening at the house of Privy Councillor
Wendel, who was interested in hypnotism. After
an early supper an interesting medium would
appear. In her trances memories were awakened
within her which referred to her very earliest days
... to a time when the mind was not developed
enough to be able to record or describe the
physical existence of the moment.</p>

<p>Mabuse had made the Privy Councillor’s
acquaintance through a patient of his, an aristocratic
and wealthy dame, who had suffered from
severe neurosis and whom Mabuse had very
successfully treated by hypnotic suggestion. In
the company were to be found not only professors,
but also authors, artists and the reputed friends
of art, such as frequent the society of the
wealthy and fashionable nowadays.</p>

<p>Mabuse’s neighbour at the supper-table was a
lady whom he recognized with astonishment and
perplexity. In the gambling-dens she was known
to his accomplices by the nickname of “the
dummy.” The lady was Countess Told.</p>

<p>Throughout the meal he devoted himself to her,
paying her every possible attention, and relating
to her eager ears tales of strange and wonderful<span class="pagenum" id="Page_156">[156]</span>
experiences in hazardous places, of the chase of
wild animals or of human beings in parts of the
world that are little frequented. He spoke with
a grim earnestness, a savage unrestraint, enjoying
once more in recollection the powers he had
exercised in such circumstances. He realized what
it was that drove this woman to the gambling-dens,
and it seemed as if this sudden disclosure
gave him a pang, as if there opened up within
him a chasm and a gulf so deep that only a
palpitating human heart could fill it. With his
imagination and with his bold recital he was
pursuing such a heart, as in the jungle he had
pursued the tiger. The hope of conquest inflamed
his blood; he felt he must make it his
own.</p>

<p>It was this woman’s heart he wished to subjugate.
He was consumed with passionate desire
as he read in her eyes how his recital fired her
blood. That was the kind of life she craved,
and her nature understood and responded to it.
He painted wild scenes for her; he showed himself
struggling for conquest with body, soul and
spirit pitted against unrestrained nature, and he
desired her to believe that this wild and unrestrained
nature was within her.</p>

<p>She trembled at his words, and, swayed by
his ardour, a longing for support and tenderness
overcame her. The recitals by which he sought
to enchain her interest aroused so forceful an
impression of human power that it seemed, in
tearing herself away from them, she was actually
tearing a fragment of living, bleeding flesh when
she sought out her husband with an almost supplicating<span class="pagenum" id="Page_157">[157]</span>
gesture, as if desirous of protection from
a force too powerful to endure.</p>

<p>Mabuse saw her gesture, and the blood mounted
to his forehead. He was flushed with passionate
desire, and could no longer bear to see the glances
of others rest upon her ... other strangers
address her ... the lips of other men pressed to
her hand ... or the thought that any other will
should impose itself on her. His was the call
of blood that should reach her, and inflamed with
passion and desire, he left the house and drove
home.</p>

<p>All his thoughts were centred on her, however,
and as he rapidly increased the distance between
them, and as it were tore the bleeding flesh from
his body, he called out to the image which filled
the yearning gulf within him, “Death and desire!
death and desire!”</p>

<p>At home he drank until all around him had
dissolved in the mists of intoxication, and he no
longer saw anything but her heart, her bleeding
heart, snatched by his hand from her lovely body,
held in his grasp, enticing and inflaming his
passion.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>At length came the day when Countess Told
should enter upon her prison experiences. She
repaired to Wenk’s chambers, and he took her to
the building, making the governor <i>au courant</i> of
the whole story. Before being led to the cell,
she asked, “How long am I to stay there?”</p>

<p>“As long as you like, Countess,” replied Wenk.
“It all depends upon your skill, but of course
you have but to say the word and you are free<span class="pagenum" id="Page_158">[158]</span>
in an instant, even if you have not achieved your
object.”</p>

<p>“I have plenty of time,” she answered, “but I
should like to ask for leave next Monday, so
that I can keep an appointment.”</p>

<p>“Most certainly, we can easily arrange that.
With your permission, I will come and fetch you.
Besides, you are sure to have something to report
by then!”</p>

<p>“Finally, Dr. Wenk,” said the Countess, “I
want you to know that my husband is in the
secret, and you will go and see him, won’t you?
Promise me!”</p>

<p>Wenk assented. A warder took possession of
the Countess, and as she went with him she smiled
back at Wenk. “Good luck!” cried he, ere
she vanished along the corridor.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>The Countess had left the Privy Councillor’s
house in a strange tumult of feeling. The stranger
who had so impressed her had suddenly disappeared,
but his forceful personality had left its
mark, and she could not free herself of it. This
mysterious and compelling power of his effaced
the image of Wenk, and the latter receded into
the background.</p>

<p>When the door of the cell opened before her,
it seemed as if the time she had to spend in this
narrow space, this strange, cold chamber, so far
removed from the world, would be a period of
probation, a time of testing for herself.</p>

<p>She was to see the stranger again on Monday.
“I am asking your neighbour at the supper-table
next Monday for another sitting with our medium,”<span class="pagenum" id="Page_159">[159]</span>
the old Councillor had said to her with a mischievous
smile. “He must make up for lost time,
because he was called away unexpectedly. But
if he did not see the medium asleep, at any rate
he found Countess Told awake!”</p>

<p>“All right! I shall be pleased to meet him
again,” she had answered in a friendly and noncommittal
tone.</p>

<p>The door of the cell closed behind her, and
she saw a figure seated on a stool, but it
did not turn round. “Well?” it said growlingly.</p>

<p>“Good morning,” said the Countess.</p>

<p>The dancer turned round slowly. When she at
length faced the Countess, the latter uttered a
little cry, and with well-feigned astonishment
hastened to Cara, exclaiming, “What, <i>you</i> here,
my dear! But we know each other! What a
strange coincidence!”</p>

<p>She began chattering at once, as if quite
oblivious of Cara’s sullen mood. “Just imagine,
they actually caught us all—at Schramm’s—the
most noted resort of them all! I can tell you
there was a fine to-do, my dear. One man sobbed,
another tried to jump out of the window, and
you know they are all shut up tight! Somebody
sat down and wailed, ‘Oh my wife, my four
children, I am disgraced for ever!’ There was
a tremendous fluttering in the dovecot. I could
not slip away in time, and so they got me too!
Tell me what is the best thing for me to do?
There’s nothing wrong in entering a gaming-house,
and I have never once played!”</p>

<p>But Cara only eyed her gloomily.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_160">[160]</span>“Do say something. Is there anything the
matter?” pleaded the Countess.</p>

<p>“The matter is that I want you to leave me
alone,” answered the other. “Was the young
gentleman with the fair sandy beard there?”</p>

<p>“The one who played against Basch, you mean?
No, he wasn’t there. I have never seen him since
that night.”</p>

<p>“Was the old Professor there?”</p>

<p>“No, I didn’t see him either.”</p>

<p>“Then you needn’t tell me any more about
it; it doesn’t interest me. The whole world isn’t
worth a pin. I am miserable, for I am forsaken
and betrayed. There’s no interest left in life for
me. I am lost and undone, and no one troubles
any more about me than if I were a frozen field-mouse.
What dirty dogs they are!”</p>

<p>Suddenly she sprang from her stool and seized
the Countess by the shoulders. “You were with
the rest of us. I want to drum it into your
head,” she continued with increasing vehemence,
“that there never was anybody so treacherously
betrayed as I have been. And there was no
reason for doing it, for I was an artiste, a well-known
and admired artiste, and here I am now,
forsaken and betrayed! Cast aside like a
squeezed-out orange!”</p>

<p>“Why did he forsake you?” asked the
Countess shyly. In her own mind she seemed
but a simple child in the presence of this wild
and passionate personality. Yes, he had forsaken
her, left her for ever, she reflected, and she
shuddered at the thought. And now he was dead.
At the moment she felt doubtful of the enterprise<span class="pagenum" id="Page_161">[161]</span>
she had undertaken. “He is dead,” she said in
a low voice which vibrated.</p>

<p>“Who?” cried Cara.</p>

<p>“Your friend ... Hull!” answered the
Countess, preparing to enter sympathetically into
the girl’s feelings, the image of Wenk growing
yet fainter in her subconscious mind.</p>

<p>But the other exclaimed passionately, “What
are you saying? The man I mean is not dead;
he is alive, and yet I sit here in prison. Yonder
in the town outside he stands, strong as a tower,
firm as a rock, I tell you! How can a puny
thing like you know what he was? All others
were as dirt beneath his feet, and their faithlessness
too small a trifle to consider! Hull is dead,
but what does <i>that</i> matter? Who cares an atom
about <i>him</i>? But that other, the master, the lord,
he lives there in the free air, where there is light
and love and life ... where he might bear to
have me lying at his feet, like a rug that only
serves to warm his toes. He is the great man,
the lord, the master! He is a bear, a lion,
a royal Bengal tiger, do you hear? He does
not belong to this cold and frosty land; he comes
from Bengal, from paradise, from a place I shall
never see again! And I—I—am left to linger
in this dungeon!”</p>

<p>Suddenly she said, quite calmly and seriously,
“Tell me, do you think there are men whose
will is so strong that they can break down even
these walls when they know how passionately I
desire it?”</p>

<p>“There are no such men outside, but within
us there are!” answered the Countess, carried<span class="pagenum" id="Page_162">[162]</span>
away by the vehemence of that passionate storm
of feeling which had so lately broken over her.
How contemptible it was of her, she thought, to
have desired to outwit a human being. She felt
mean in her own estimation, and casting all projects
and promises to the winds, she began to glow
in the presence of this strange personality like
the spark of an electric current. “Yes, they
are to be found in us!” she repeated.</p>

<p>“He! he! the conqueror!” sang Cara, with a
sound of passion in her tone, and in the Countess’s
heart, too, there sprang up, like a marble image,
the form of the man she had met a few evenings
before. On her heart this image was sculptured,
and she allowed its impress to recur again and
again and remain there.</p>

<p>“Do you love him?” she asked the dancer.</p>

<p>But the other answered, as if brushing away
an unconsidered trifle, “I ... love? I <i>adore</i>
him!”</p>

<p>“I do not love him!” hastily asseverated the
Countess, pursuing the mental image she had conjured
up. “But yet he is great, superhuman.
He is a world in himself. In the midst of this
tame and quiet existence he is as a jungle and
primeval forest. It seems to me as if he must
have both the tiger and the serpent within him,
as well as all that is boldest in Nature, its gigantic
trees, its wild and impenetrable forests. Do you
know, one can creep within them, never coming
to an end, and yet be in him!”</p>

<p>She broke off suddenly. She dared not put
into words the fancies evoked within her. For
the husband whose eccentricities she tolerated<span class="pagenum" id="Page_163">[163]</span>
was no more to her than a brother—nay, a
father. They were bound together by one
voluptuous hour of which no human being knew
or even suspected. It was such an hour as that
in which two human personalities melted into
one to create a new being that later on might
emerge and begin a life bound by invisible ties
to that mysterious hour. The threads might be
torn from their place, snapped, distorted, yet they
remained entwined. No other desire now possessed
her than to yield her senses once more unrestrainedly
to that consciousness of the depths of
her being which enfolded her as in a dream, and
which she nevertheless continually thrust aside.</p>

<p>The two women sat close together, the Countess
on the ground. Both seemed alike to be struck
down by an invisible and imperious fist, striking
at these centres of abandonment and yearning
and self-betrayal. After the hasty and intimate
avowals forced from them, the shadow of silence
fell upon them.</p>

<p>“Say something!” pleaded the Countess
timidly.</p>

<p>“Be silent, or I shall strangle you ... with
my own hands!” cried the dancer.</p>

<p>The Countess shrank back, feeling herself,
beside the other, to resemble a hare in the claws
of a mighty and powerful bird of prey.</p>

<p>Food was pushed into the cell, but neither
of the women perceived it. It grew dark, and
the dancer lay down, fully dressed, upon one of
the plank beds. The Countess imitated her and
stretched herself on the other straw pallet. The
night passed by, and in the long sleepless hours<span class="pagenum" id="Page_164">[164]</span>
their fancies flowed into a dark and turgid
stream.</p>

<p>Suddenly in the gloom Cara’s voice was heard:
“Are you asleep?”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“Why are you here?”</p>

<p>The Countess had not the courage to repeat
her tissue of lies, and she remained silent. Cara,
too, kept silent for a while, then she said suddenly:</p>

<p>“You were sent here to pump me! Have I
told you anything?”</p>

<p>“Yes.”</p>

<p>“About <i>him</i>?”</p>

<p>“Yes.”</p>

<p>“Did I tell you his name?”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“That’s all right then, otherwise you would
never leave this place alive. But if you are lying,
and I had told it you, I tell you now, he <i>has</i>
no name. He is a thousand men, a whole nation,
a part of the universe!”</p>

<p>“Just like the man I have been thinking of,”
reflected the Countess, but an instant later she
did not know whether she had not spoken her
thought aloud.</p>

<p>“When are you going away again?”</p>

<p>“When you want me to.”</p>

<p>“Then go at once, and tell everything I have
told you!”</p>

<p>“No,” answered the Countess resolutely.</p>

<p>“Why don’t you, when that is what you came
here for?”</p>

<p>“Things are different now.”</p>

<p>“Nothing is different,” asserted the dancer<span class="pagenum" id="Page_165">[165]</span>
vehemently. “Everything is as it was and will
ever be. He is out there, free as the air; I am
here like a carcass rotting on the ground. Tell
everything you know.”</p>

<p>“I shall say nothing!”</p>

<p>“Why not, you—you cursed hussy!” she
shrieked.</p>

<p>“Because you love him so!”</p>

<p>Then the dancer grew calm again, but a few
moments later she burst into tears and sobbed
wildly and unrestrainedly.</p>

<p>The Countess lay still on her pallet. She felt
as if a naked soul with claws, whence the skin
and tissues had been withdrawn, were clutching
at her heart and holding it within its grasp.
She felt her own blood shudder and leap up beneath
the claws and mingle with that of the other.
This naked soul that clutched at her was her
sister. She was akin in blood to the criminal
yonder, but neither of the women knew that he
who had thus caused their hearts to beat in unison
during this night in prison was one and the same
mysterious being.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_166">[166]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XI</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> news Wenk received of Karstens’ state was
very unsatisfactory. Since he had, apparently,
offered strong resistance to his attackers, a second
man seemed to have struck him violently on the
head with a crowbar, and the blow had resulted
in concussion of the brain. At intervals he became
conscious, but for short periods only, and at present
it was impossible to say what the outcome would
be. His state was so critical, the doctor declared,
that any sustained conversation with him could
not be thought of for at least two or three weeks.</p>

<p>As for the dancer, about whose participation
in the affair he would have something to say,
as his shout to the constables to take her into
custody proved, Wenk had for the present to
content himself with any evidence the Countess
might obtain. To-day was Monday, and at four
o’clock in any case he would hear whether any
explanation might be looked for from Cara
Carozza.</p>

<p>He did not leave the house that day. The
two main centres of his activity could not be
reached by him in person; one was the women’s
prison, the other, and far more important, was
the town of Constance. He was frequently called
up by telephone from the latter place, for this<span class="pagenum" id="Page_167">[167]</span>
Poldringer had to be kept constantly under
surveillance.</p>

<p>While spending the waiting hours at home impatiently,
he frequently walked backwards and
forwards to the window. On one of these occasions
he noticed a man whom he had first seen as
early as eight o’clock, and again half an hour
later, and then not again for some time. The
man always happened to be passing the house
rapidly, or else standing at a turning some distance
off. Could it be that he was there to spy upon
his movements? Wenk resolved to put the matter
to the test.</p>

<p>He ordered one of the members of the Secret
Police to disguise himself so that anyone at a
hasty glance might mistake him for the State
Attorney. Then Wenk’s chauffeur brought round
the car to the door where the masquerader was
waiting, and at a moment when the stranger was
again visible at a corner this man got in quickly,
settled himself down inside, and was rapidly driven
away. “I shall be able to see how this simple
trick succeeds,” said Wenk to himself.</p>

<p>At this moment there was an urgent call from
Constance. “The man under observation brought
the young fellows in his company to the station
at 3.16 p.m. The Offenburg express is due to
leave at 3.36. It is uncertain which of the party
will travel by it; some have hand luggage, and
the others none, and it is not yet ascertainable
whether the suspected man will accompany them.
One of them bought seven tickets for Offenburg,
but the party consists of eight, and one among
them looks different and has never been seen here<span class="pagenum" id="Page_168">[168]</span>
before. It is possible that he may be the leader
of the expedition, and in the service of the French.
How are we to proceed?”</p>

<p>“Have three plain-clothes police ready. If the
eight go by train, let these three go too. If one
or more stay behind, let one of the men be left
too, so that those remaining are not allowed out of
sight. They may be travelling by separate routes.”</p>

<p>The telephone official repeated the order given.
“Good. Arrange to speak to me immediately
after the departure of the express. Ring off.”</p>

<p>Wenk asked to be connected with Offenburg, and
in five minutes he was able to get on to the police
there.</p>

<p>“Seven, or possibly eight, men are arriving by
the express from Constance. Plain-clothes men
are in the same train. See that sixteen armed
police are in readiness at the station. It is probable
that the travellers will have passes to Alsace.
They are forged.... When you arrest the men,
be careful to avoid observation, and the only information
to be given to the Press is that it was
a case of Germans having been enticed into the
Foreign Legion; and mind you state expressly
that they will be at once set free and returned
to their homes. You will know nothing about the
forged passports. In case there is a man of the
name of Poldringer or Hinrichsen among them,
let him be separated from the rest and kept in
close custody.”</p>

<p>Shortly after Constance telephoned again:
“Seven men have left. It is Poldringer who
stayed behind; he went to the ‘Black Bull,’ and
is under observation there.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_169">[169]</span>“Good. Thank you. Please ring up here
again at seven o’clock, and should anything important
occur in the meantime, notify the Criminal
Investigation Department.”</p>

<p>Then Wenk had to hurry, so that he might call
for the Countess at the prison at four o’clock.
It was then half-past three, and he was alone in
the house. He telephoned for his car, and just
as he was going downstairs he heard a knock at
the front door. He opened it.</p>

<p>An elderly man was standing there. His figure
was bent, and he had a bushy snow-white beard,
red cheeks and blue eyes.</p>

<p>“Herr von Wenk?” he inquired courteously.</p>

<p>“Please come in,” answered the lawyer, “but
I am sorry to say that I am just going out on
urgent official business.”</p>

<p>“I will not detain you a moment,” said the
other. “My name is Hull, and I am the father
of the murdered man!”</p>

<p>Wenk bowed, and led the way to his office.</p>

<p>“Herr von Wenk, I have been told that you
are conducting this inquiry. Edgar was my only
son, and I brought him up badly, for my whole
time was given to my business, and I had vast
interests. My wife died when he was but a child.
I think many sons in our days have had a similar
experience.” He spoke evenly, almost harshly.
“But that does not free me from blame. Our
sons were our pleasure, our business our duty.
It would have been better had it been the other
way about. I cannot desire such a life as his
to be restored, for what I have heard from various
sides about the circumstances of the case is sufficient,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_170">[170]</span>
and I do not wish to know more, but I
have allowed myself the liberty of calling upon
you for other reasons. My son used to receive
an income of ten thousand marks from me each
month, and the only wish left me in this unhappy
affair is to be able to spend these ten thousand
marks as if he were still living, and add another
ten thousand to them. I want the money to be
used to help men to make good, and how am I to
set about this? Can you advise me, sir?”</p>

<p>Wenk answered in a hesitating tone, “I must
first of all confess, Herr von Hull, that your words
have taken me aback!”</p>

<p>This man’s bearing moved him deeply. Restrained
force of character, suppressed paternal
grief, unutterable sympathy ... everything that
had thus unexpectedly been laid bare to him,
threw him for the moment somewhat off his
balance. “Yes. I don’t know ... Herr von
Hull, why did you come to <i>me</i> above all men?”</p>

<p>“I can tell you that at once, sir. It is your
task to bring the murderers to justice, and I
should like to replace with something that is
beneficial the harm that has been done by one of
my house. I should like the recollection of my
son to bear good fruit. I have had nothing of
his life, but perchance his death may yield something
that may plead for me in eternity.” His
voice remained firm until the last word had been
uttered. “But I must not forget that you are
in a hurry,” he continued. “Perhaps it is this
same unhappy affair which prevents your giving
me any more time now?”</p>

<p>“You are right,” said the lawyer.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_171">[171]</span>“Can I see you to-morrow or some other day,
when we can talk quietly, when you are free?”</p>

<p>“I shall be free to-morrow, my dear sir. Come
when most convenient to you, preferably in the
morning. You are not obliged to fix an exact
time, for I shall be at home all day. I thank
you for your suggestion; we shall be enabled
to do a splendid piece of work together, I believe.”</p>

<p>“Nay, it is I who must thank you for being
willing to help me raise a memorial to my unhappy
boy that shall redeem his name among his fellow-men.”</p>

<p>They left the house together, and Wenk drove
rapidly to the prison. “The lady left here long
before four o’clock,” said the Governor.</p>

<p>“Indeed!” said Wenk, disappointed. “What
did she leave for me?”</p>

<p>“Nothing!”</p>

<p>“And you yourself know nothing either? About
the matter she had in hand, did she get any
results?”</p>

<p>“I did not inquire.”</p>

<p>“Why not?” said Wenk, annoyed by his
manner.</p>

<p>“I was not instructed to do so,” answered the
Governor morosely.</p>

<p>“It is not a question of your exact instructions,
but of attempting to track to earth one of the most
dangerous bands of criminals Germany has ever
known. You don’t seem to realize that. What you
and your instructions may be counts for nothing.”</p>

<p>“So much the better. Perhaps another time I
may be spared such innovations....”</p>

<p>“You do not seem to feel yourself thoroughly<span class="pagenum" id="Page_172">[172]</span>
comfortable in your post, Governor. I will say
a word for you to the Home Secretary! Good
morning.”</p>

<p>“What has happened?” said Wenk to himself.
“What is up?” He felt disappointed and angry
as he took his seat in the car again.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>At seven o’clock that evening the Countess
drove to the Privy Councillor’s mansion. She
found the same company assembled there as on
the last occasion, and this time, too, she saw as
little of them. Around her and Dr. Mabuse, her
partner at the supper-table, the conversation rose
and fell, isolating them from the rest. Her
neighbour was more silent than on the previous
occasion, but everything he said was spoken with
an impressive intent, directed towards a goal which
was unrecognizable.</p>

<p>The Countess was divided in her own mind
as to whether she should relate her experience
in the prison to him, should tell him that she had
come in contact with the soul of a woman, strong
and fearless as the figures in his own recitals;
yea, even stronger, since it was a woman, experienced
in renunciation, and carrying on her
conflict in resistance and defence.</p>

<p>In imagination she had entered so thoroughly into
the struggle, and her encounter with this criminal
seemed to open up such unusual circumstances, that
the power of the man at her side insensibly seemed
to lessen, and this second meeting with him
appeared to yield nothing that her passionate anticipation
had longed for. The man seemed to decline
before her.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_173">[173]</span>She noticed that while he uttered his imperious
sentences, both at their first meeting and on this
occasion, he kept his eyes fixed on her with a
compelling look. They were grey eyes, and their
glance was a steely one. She grew somewhat
frightened, and in her anxiety yearned for some
human being who could warm her breast with his
sympathy and afford her troubled spirit peace.</p>

<p>She looked across at her husband. He was
sitting near the medium, engaging her in talk, and
it seemed as if his words were the mere play of
his graceful fingers, on one of which the ring
was flashing, as if dominating the whole. Then
the woman’s heart was overcome with a strange
sad feeling, stilling the fever in her breast—a feeling
of lofty womanly sympathy. He seemed such
a child, she said to herself. “Without me he
would be defenceless. He is like a hoop rolling
down the street, its course determined by the
obstacles and unevennesses in its path.”</p>

<p>With this feeling upon her, she experienced a
renewed glow as she thought of her encounter
with the dancer; she was lifted out of her everyday
existence, borne onward as in a mighty rush
of passion, then again becoming cool and collected
as at the contact with something cold and
forbidding. It seemed to her then that she was
struggling to reach her husband and ever as she
approached him she was driven back, encountering
the inflexible and steely glance of the man beside
her.</p>

<p>Mabuse grew more and more silent. He ate
nothing, and he took no pains to conceal his
taciturnity. On the contrary, he seemed, as it<span class="pagenum" id="Page_174">[174]</span>
were, to strive to impress it upon the whole company,
just as a mighty African potentate might
exercise his tyranny on his patient and long-suffering
followers, and the very actions of the
others served to accentuate this attitude of adoration
of a superior force.</p>

<p>Count Told alone seemed to trifle with graceful
gestures about the medium, who, black-haired and
deadly pale, kept her unwieldy form pressed close to
his side, seeming to have eyes for no other. Then
the Countess felt that she hated the man who sat
beside her in his sullen mood while her husband’s
attitude was thus bordering on the ridiculous. And
yet it was not hate she felt, but the inward
conflict between the desire to yield herself to the
domination of a self-sufficing and stronger heart
and brain and resistance to the impulse of
subjugation.</p>

<p>The supper-table was cleared and the company
stood around talking for a while. Mabuse had left
his table-companion and sought the society of
Count Told. He engaged him in a discourse on
the psychological aspect of gambling.</p>

<p>“I am a born gambler,” said the Count.
“When I am losing, I remain as cold as ice, but
when I am winning my brain lights up and my
phantasies are redoubled.”</p>

<p>Then Mabuse said: “Games of chance are the
oldest form, the strongest and most widespread
form, in which a man who is not gifted with artistic
expression may yet feel himself an artist.”</p>

<p>“That is an interesting idea,” said the Count;
“pray follow it up a little further.”</p>

<p>“It is because in a game of chance every man<span class="pagenum" id="Page_175">[175]</span>
feels that he can force himself to a creative act.
Creation, through the principle which underlies all
life, draws its force from the parallel powers of
volition and accident. By accident we must
understand all that is untried, immeasurable,
strange, and impossible of expression in itself.
This is, too, the mental process of creative work,
to which nature has lent a portion of primal force,
the work of the artist! Between the poles of
volition and accident this power is wielded
as in a state of trance. Goethe confessed that to
be the case with himself when he was composing
his poems. In games of chance there is a like
synthesis. Accident gives the player his material—it
may be trifling and insignificant, or it may
be of dominating power. The player sets his will
to work to accomplish a creation of his own from
his material.”</p>

<p>“You are a poet yourself, Doctor?”</p>

<p>“Oh, no, I am a physician practising psychotherapy.”</p>

<p>“Such people are our most modern poets. For
they give our knowledge of the unconscious, or
rather the subconscious, its perceptible form, and
the subconscious world, which is now firmly
established, produces our psychic existence. We
will have a game of baccarat afterwards, shall we
not?”</p>

<p>“Agreed!”</p>

<p>The hypnotic subject was about to begin her
test. A doctor led her forward and threw her
into a hypnosis in which she would recall her
wonderful recollections. On the first evening, as
Count Told informed Mabuse in an awestruck<span class="pagenum" id="Page_176">[176]</span>
whisper, she had related her mental experiences
during her first attempts to walk.</p>

<p>While the Count was speaking he felt an
unnatural warmth stealing over the back of his
head. He turned round, but there was nothing
behind him save the tapestried wall, upon which
pictures of the old school, to which he was quite
indifferent, were hanging.</p>

<p>The patient did not respond to the hypnotist’s
suggestions. She did indeed fall into a state of
trance, but all the spectators could see that gradually
the expression of her eyes indicated that she
was returning from a far-off view, until suddenly
they looked straight ahead and were wide awake
again, awake and indignant.</p>

<p>“Someone is tormenting me,” she said.</p>

<p>“No one is tormenting you,” said the hypnotist
in a monotonous and measured tone. “We are
guiding you to the early home of your youth—one,
two, three ... you are sleeping—one, two
... you are sleeping!”</p>

<p>He passed his hand slowly and lightly over
her forehead, continuing to count, “Three ...
one ... two ... where are you now?—how old
are you?”</p>

<p>“I am ten months and three days old.”</p>

<p>“What did your mother do this morning when
she took you out of the cradle?”</p>

<p>“She unwrapped me and hurt me and ...
and ...” She breathed a deep sigh, then
awoke suddenly and said, “There is someone
here who ought to go away. Who is tormenting
me?”</p>

<p>“We can obtain no results to-day. There are<span class="pagenum" id="Page_177">[177]</span>
some disturbing influences which I do not recognize
and therefore cannot remove,” said the
hypnotist.</p>

<p>The Privy Councillor approached Mabuse.
“How would it be, Doctor, if <i>you</i> were to make
an attempt? After the tests of your power which
I have already seen, I think we can promise to
get rid of these disturbing influences,” he said.</p>

<p>Mabuse declared himself willing to try, at any
rate, though he could not vouch for the result, as
he was suffering from a slight chill which affected
his head. He at once took a short step towards
the medium, however, and they saw that she moved
slightly in his direction as if attracted by a magnet.
Mabuse did not utter a word, but he let his glance
wander over part of her body. The girl became
even paler than before, if possible, and although
she made no movement, it was easy to see that
she struggled against something invisible, that her
resistance grew quickly weaker and that her eyes
fell before him.</p>

<p>Then Mabuse said in a rapid and violent tone:
“You are lying in swaddling clothes. Your arms
are bound fast to your side. You are six months’
old. It is evening, and you are crying. Why
are you crying?”</p>

<p>And from the heavy body of this girl, sleeping
with wide-open eyes, there came a piping, fretful
voice: “I have a pain in my stomach.”</p>

<p>“That is only wind. You’ve had too much to
drink. Who gave it you?”</p>

<p>“I got it from the breast of a woman,” answered
the baby voice.</p>

<p>“Do you love that breast?”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_178">[178]</span>Then the girl grew deathly white, and into the
childish voice there crept a piercing and angry
note, “No.”</p>

<p>“What did you want to do?”</p>

<p>“I wanted to bite it with my gums!”</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>Then the girl was seized with trembling, which
passed over her whole body, and Mabuse said,
“Every minute that prolongs this endangers her
life. I must bring the experiment to an end!”</p>

<p>He laid the girl down on a sofa, and with
reassuring movements he released her from sleep
and bathed her face, and when she came to herself
again recommended her being put to bed.</p>

<p>The conversation now turned upon Mabuse’s
experiment, and everyone was asking questions,
speculating on what she would have said.</p>

<p>“That was a fairy-tale,” said Told; “a fable
of the preconscious existence! Doctor, you are
a genius. But what did she want to say that
made her tremble so?”</p>

<p>A lady came forward with the same question
on her lips, but Mabuse’s eyes sought the Countess,
and she, too, came forward to ask. Then Mabuse
answered, “She wanted to say, ‘Because I hated
her so!’”</p>

<p>The Countess shrank back and the others were
silent, painfully affected. Then the Countess leaned
forward, saying coldly, “A baby cannot hate!”</p>

<p>“How do you know that?” asked Mabuse
roughly.</p>

<p>“I know it ... of myself,” she replied.</p>

<p>“Then you can rejoice over yourself, for you
are not only a genius at recollection, but also<span class="pagenum" id="Page_179">[179]</span>
an angel in disposition!” retorted Mabuse
sarcastically.</p>

<p>Conversation broke the company up into little
groups. Count Told alone remained silent. There
was still that unnatural warmth at the back of
his head. He looked behind him, and he felt
his head; there was nothing there. He went to
a mirror, but nothing was to be seen. He sat
down again and it seemed as if he were falling
asleep, yet he saw them all and heard everything.
He wanted to say something, but it seemed as if
the words were plucked from his mouth like ripened
fruit ready to fall.</p>

<p>After a short time had passed thus, he rose and
went to the group wherein Dr. Mabuse was standing,
saying, “We were going to play baccarat!”</p>

<p>“So we were!” answered Mabuse. “Shall we
be likely to find enough players?”</p>

<p>Then Told grew wide awake and eager. “It
will be fine, playing baccarat with you. Herr
Wendel, will you join us, eh?”</p>

<p>“I must attend to my social duties among the
ladies,” answered the Privy Councillor, “but you
will soon be able to find partners!”</p>

<p>Six gentlemen quickly gathered round the card-table
which stood in a part of the room leading
to the conservatory. The lamp with its enormous
shade hung low over the table, leaving the rest of
the room in the half-light. In the conservatory,
to which a glass door led, the ghostly branches
of foreign palms could be seen outlined against
the glass, and in the moonlight they looked like
stiff forms stretching their dark limbs heavenwards.</p>

<p>They cut the cards to see who should be the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_180">[180]</span>
first to hold the stakes. The visitors crowded
round the card-table and Countess Told stood in
the dim light, looking down upon it. Mabuse saw
her smooth white skin gleaming from the rich
dark red dress she wore. His bearing was cold
and gloomy, and scarcely a word escaped his
lips. The feelings that arose within him were
sternly suppressed, and his thoughts were busy
with Count Told alone. When anyone addressed
him, he answered abruptly. He seemed to pay
great attention to the game, but he played by leaps
and bounds.</p>

<p>Soon the gentlemen who had begun their game
with modest stakes began to imitate his example,
and there was no unanimity in the value of the
stakes. Beside a stake of a mark or two there
stood a fifty-mark note, and then one for two
hundred. The small stake seemed to feel
ashamed; it rapidly became twenty, and still faster
it grew to a hundred, to two hundred.... Very
soon there was no player who ventured less than a
hundred marks. When they began they found
time for conversation between the end of the hand
and the fresh deal, but after a time the talk grew
less, and then ceased. The onlookers, too, became
silent. The contest between the players grew more
pronounced, the game feverish, and this excitement
spread to the spectators.</p>

<p>The Countess noted the high stakes her husband
wagered. “He has never played before,” she
thought. “What is the matter with him?”</p>

<p>The Count was winning. He let his winnings
accumulate. It seemed as if he were a horse,
urged and threatened onward by an eager rider.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_181">[181]</span>
He threw his money down. It was now his turn
to hold the stakes. It seemed to him as if the
moment in which he should deal the cards and
undertake the manifold risks of gain or loss would
be a supreme experience for him, yielding rich
secrets of wonderful joy. He grew excited, and
his phantasies played about the room.</p>

<p>The Countess turned aside in the half-light, constrained
at her husband’s incomprehensible actions.
Suddenly the full light of the lamp fell upon her,
revealing where her slender breast rose white and
stately from the enclosing circle of her gown.</p>

<p>“North and south!” said Mabuse, as he contemplated
her lovely figure, “north and south,
your turn is coming,” and his tone was sinister
and threatening. Then he turned his glance away,
and it fell upon Count Told’s hands as he took
over the bank at this moment. He dealt the
cards out, and hesitated a moment as if perplexed
at some strange occurrence. He was relieved when
he had distributed the pack. He won considerable
sums, and it was singular that the same feeling
of perplexity recurred. He won a second time,
and now this seemed to happen continually.
Players and spectators alike were astonished at
the run of luck the Count’s game exhibited.</p>

<p>“Look at your husband,” said someone, turning
to the Countess; “he is winning every hand.”</p>

<p>They all cast a glance at the Countess and then
quickly returned to their cards. The Count dealt
the cards once more. He disclosed his cards; he
had two picture cards and was about to buy
another.</p>

<p>“Halt!” cried a voice suddenly, like the voice<span class="pagenum" id="Page_182">[182]</span>
of a drill sergeant, and a hand was laid roughly
on the table, reaching the white and delicate hand
of the Count, on which the jewelled ring was
sparkling, and turning it over. Then all the company
saw that the Count had been about to take
a card from underneath the pack instead of the
one that lay on the top. The card was a nine.</p>

<p>“Aha, a nine! <i>Now</i> I understand your luck,
you gudgeon! You are a common cheat!”</p>

<p>They all sprang up in confusion. Count Told
sat still in his chair, in a state of utter collapse.
He seemed absolutely crushed, finding no word to
say.</p>

<p>“Give the money here!” cried the harsh voice
again. “All of it!” The tone was threatening.</p>

<p>The spectators and the players were crowding
together, and a cry rang through the obscurity.
Through the hasty movements of the powerful man
who had seized the Count, one man had fallen
to the ground, dragging another down with him.
The latter clutched at the tablecloth, and it was
pulled off, money and cards being strewn over the
floor, people flinging themselves upon it. Suddenly
the electric lights went out, but Dr. Mabuse,
who had waited for the cry from the dark corner,
rushed to the fainting Countess, lifted her in his
arms and with one spring bore her under the palms
and out into the garden under the moonlight,
through the shrubbery and to the wall leading to
the street. He lifted her over, and from the other
side someone helped him with his burden. An
instant later a car was stealing swiftly down the
street.</p>

<p>“The northern and southern hemispheres,” he<span class="pagenum" id="Page_183">[183]</span>
shouted aloud furiously during the drive. “Now
I hold you both!”</p>

<p>The Xenienstrasse was empty. The car came to
a sudden standstill. He carried the Countess, still
unconscious, into his house.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_184">[184]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XII</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Scarcely</span> heeding the abuse and scorn heaped
upon him by the crowd, out of the chaos and
confusion of the contemptuous glances of others
and his own feeling of perplexity, Count Told stole,
as if in a dream, towards the vestibule. He
thought of his wife, but he had not the courage
to look round for or inquire about her. His car
stood before the door, and the chauffeur was about
to start the engine when the Count made a gesture
of denial, saying, “Wait for the Countess!”</p>

<p>He went into the town and hired the first taxi
he saw to drive him home. “What has happened
to me?” was the question that he perpetually put
to himself. “What was it that overcame me?
Who moved my hand?... What is it that has
happened? I know nothing about it. Can it be
merely a bad dream?”</p>

<p>But it was no dream. He reached his house and
had to descend. He went down the length of the
garden and into the house. The footman took his
coat, and the Count went to the room where he and
his wife, whenever they had been out together,
were wont to spend a short time before going
to bed, in exchanging the experiences the evening
had afforded. He always looked forward eagerly
to these moments.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_185">[185]</span>To-night he was alone there. “Where can my
wife be?” he asked himself, astonished and yet
unconscious. So many tender memories clung to
this room, and he felt disappointed that in this
dreadful hour she was not by his side. It was the
first painful experience of his existence.</p>

<p>But all at once it became clear to him that she
must have sundered herself from him, and he
realized that by that inexpressibly strange occurrence
at the gaming-table in the Wendel mansion
he had covered himself with mire. It clung fast
to him, and he thought, “Lucy must leave me.
She must remain away until I have purified
myself.” But how was he to accomplish the task?</p>

<p>And suddenly there came over him, like an icy
blast in all its pitiless severity, the full meaning
of what he had done. He had done it, he really
had put cards at the bottom of the pack and then
drawn them when he wanted them, and with these
he had won money. Yet he had not desired to
win money! What could have happened? Was
there no help anywhere? He had done something
against his will. His act had thrust him out of
decent society, and to the end of his days he would
be known as a cheat. Was there no help to be
found?</p>

<p>“I know now,” he said to himself, “what it is
I have done, but I do not know how I came to
do it, neither the why nor the wherefore. I am
growing crazy, losing my self-confidence, and I
shall henceforth be unable to feel safe, whatever
I do. Horrible, monstrous thought! I am absolutely
afraid of myself. How can I ever have
reached such a point? Yonder is a sculpture by<span class="pagenum" id="Page_186">[186]</span>
Archipenko and the picture hanging there is one
of Kokoschka’s; I am quite certain of that; but
what proceeds from my own brain, and is my own
creation, of that I can never more feel certain
again. I retain my sight, hearing and feelings, but
my brain is rotting!... I shall end in a lunatic
asylum! My body moves in the light of day
while my mental powers are wrapped in a dim
twilight. Is there no one that can help me?”</p>

<p>He struggled with his tears, but he could not
even allow himself to weep, for he thought, “Perhaps
I shall lose all consciousness of what I am
doing. If I weep, may I not possibly destroy a
picture that I have hitherto loved and worshipped,
or abuse my man, or act improperly to Lucy’s
maid?”</p>

<p>And suddenly, at the utterance of his wife’s
name, he collapsed entirely. “Ah, Lucy, light of
my life, can <i>you</i> not help me?” he cried. “Will
you not come? Have you no longer faith in me?
Why am I left alone?”</p>

<p>He rang, and then, hastening to meet the footman,
inquired for the Countess.</p>

<p>“The Countess has not yet returned,” he was
told.</p>

<p>“Nor telephoned? Has she not...”</p>

<p>“No, my lord, but an hour ago Herr Dr. von
Wenk rang up, asking if he might have the honour
of waiting on her ladyship to-morrow morning.
His telephone number has been written down.”</p>

<p>“Go!” said the Count. “I will go to Dr.
Wenk ... yes, to Dr. Wenk,” he thought, and
then, a prey to a thousand nameless fears, he cried
aloud, “Or else I shall hang myself! I must<span class="pagenum" id="Page_187">[187]</span>
be able to tell some human being what I
feel....”</p>

<p>He hurried to the telephone, giving the number
written down. “Yes, this is the State Attorney,
Dr. Wenk!” answered a strange voice in the
distance, and Told began to tremble. But he
rallied all his energy and self-control, saying, “Can
I speak to you at once?”</p>

<p>He was terribly afraid that the fever of his
desire might melt the connecting wire and that
he might get no answer. He breathed freely again
when he heard the words, “With pleasure! I shall
expect you!”</p>

<p>“Fritz!” he shouted; “get the two-seater
ready,” and he drove back to Munich.</p>

<p>Wenk believed he had come on the Countess’s
errand, and that something had happened in the
prison to put an end to the enterprise they had
in hand.</p>

<p>“I think, Count Told, that after all it was too
risky an experiment. The Countess....”</p>

<p>“No, no,” cried Told, interrupting him. “I ...
I ... it is on my own account that I’ve
come here,” and then he began his story. He
told, too, what an extraordinary sensation of heat
he had felt at the back of his head, and this must
have been the forerunner of misfortune. “Do not
be vexed, Dr. Wenk, that I, a stranger, should
come to you thus, but I should have had to
put an end to myself if I had not been able to
confide in someone to-night. May I go on? Well,
these powerful rays, that were like red-hot iron
at the back of my head, changed gradually to a
feeling of well-being throughout my whole body.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_188">[188]</span>
They seemed to bathe me in pleasant warmth,
and I had a feeling that I was somehow saved
from something that lay before me, and in this
very moment of relief ... it happened! In the
first half-hour afterwards I denied that it could
have done, but when I reached home I realized
that the dreadful story was true, and this thing
had really happened. There is no getting away
from it, either for others or for myself.”</p>

<p>Wenk at once recalled his experience with the
old Professor. He was startled. Could it be
possible that here too ... and he thought of
the Countess and of Cara Carozza. He asked
Told, “Have you any suspicion at all?”</p>

<p>The Count did not understand the question.</p>

<p>“Any suspicion? What do you mean? That I
have been like this before? Ill in this way? No,
never!”</p>

<p>“No, a suspicion of any special person who
was there?”</p>

<p>“The idea never occurred to me. I can’t understand
how anybody else could.... No ... I
don’t suspect anyone!”</p>

<p>“Was there nobody in the company who did not
seem to belong there, who was not quite like the
other guests?”</p>

<p>“It was a company of the Privy Councillor’s
intimate friends. No, there was nobody!”</p>

<p>Wenk rejected the idea. Besides, how could
there be any connection between the criminal he
was seeking and the Count’s act of cheating? It
was apparently a momentary mental aberration,
a loss of will-power. A subconscious process in
a strange and elusive personality which bordered<span class="pagenum" id="Page_189">[189]</span>
upon morbidity, which thus strove to register a
mental impression upon its fellow-players. The
Count ought to consult a psychiatrist. It was
extraordinary that he should appeal to him, a
criminal prosecutor, but he did not put any question
to him on this head.</p>

<p>Told became silent, and the lawyer respected
his mood. Then suddenly he seemed to pull
himself together and said, “I realize that I am
keeping you from your night’s rest; I beg you
not to be vexed with me. In misfortune it seems
as if the mind sinks into a gulf, and the consciousness
grasps at the nearest support. You had rung
up, and there was some connection between you
and ... my house, and so....” He broke
off. “But tell me, am I really saying what I want
to, or am I talking nonsense? You see, that is the
horror of such an experience as mine. It seems
as if I shall always require a neurologist to guide
my future life.”</p>

<p>“Reassure yourself, Count; you are speaking
quite clearly and saying exactly what you want to
express. I beg you to make use of me if you
can. My calling in some respects borders upon
the sphere of the specialist in nerve-disorders;
perhaps it goes even further, and at any rate it is
bound up with the most mysterious and most
speculative part of man’s being. I am very sorry
that the occasion that brings you to me is such
an unfortunate one, else I should be only too
pleased by your visit.”</p>

<p>While Wenk was speaking, desiring to convey
that anything out of the common which was
mentally or spiritually of an unusual and critical<span class="pagenum" id="Page_190">[190]</span>
nature was really his concern, the idea occurred to
him to enlist the Count’s sympathy in his own aims.
Count Told was a man of the world. He belonged
to a sphere through which Wenk hoped to be able
to endow the life of the nation with nobler
qualities and loftier ideals. In the practical
necessities which the last few months had forced
upon him he had almost neglected the ideal side of
the task before him. The events of this night
had brought him into unexpected relations with a
human being, and he could best serve him by not
leaving him alone. He explained his views to the
Count.</p>

<p>“They talk of ours as the ‘upper’ class. This
description, which certainly has a substratum of
truth, must be made a living reality once more.
Our class, free of the struggle to obtain a
better social status, is more than ever called upon
to foster intellectual development and mental gifts.
It must cherish these noble qualities in itself and
turn them to account for others. Our sphere of
politics must be the spiritual one!”</p>

<p>Count Told’s life hitherto had been irreproachable.
Both in sentiment and in the externals of
life he had shown himself superior, but for lack of
serious pursuits to which he could devote himself
he had thrown his energies into following up his
hobbies, such as the collection of Futurist works
of art, for which there was as yet no standard to
judge by. He patronized young poets who were
at present but a minority and a novelty. They
were brought into the light, and the discovery of
their powers engaged the serious attention of himself
and his like. The struggle to get possession<span class="pagenum" id="Page_191">[191]</span>
of something new and striking was carried on in
this respect just as it was by the profiteers of
ordinary wares.... It was not the uneducated
rich who devoted themselves to it, but those who
sought for their wealth a channel which should
return their gold stamped with the impress of
beauty and of intellectual superiority. But these
fell victims to the age, and their ideas dissolved
in hysteria akin to that of a weeping woman whose
whole consciousness can hold but one idea. The
value of money declined, and in so doing its power
over men became all the greater; it seized upon
them with ever-growing force, till at last it was
like a disease.</p>

<p>Such was the connection between the hobbies
of the Count and his like and the age they lived
in. The age made use of what was valuable in
them. The propagandists of the “new art” were
merely stockjobbers, uniting their intellectual ambitions
with their speculations. The celebrated
“Blue Horses” were to be had for a couple of
hundred marks at first. X. bought them for eight
hundred, and now it was impossible to obtain them
for two hundred thousand. It was such anecdotes
as these that spurred them on.</p>

<p>For a long time Wenk and Count Told discussed
these things. The Count opposed Wenk’s view,
having learnt some of the terminology of the artists
whose pictures he bought.</p>

<p>“Folks even begin to say,” said Wenk to him
on one occasion, “that he speaks as well as a
Futurist! And this school begins to affiliate itself
with another intellectual movement of our day,
which stands on much the same foundations—with<span class="pagenum" id="Page_192">[192]</span>
the so-called theosophy. You will notice that the
Futurist <i>eo ipso</i> is also a theosophist or an anthropologist.
But it is not because these ideas are
really inwardly connected, but because the pursuance
of them is united. You will always find
nowadays that those who most freely deplore
the materialism of our age are those who in private
life are most devoted to it. Moreover, in the one
case as in the other, it is not always a question of
money. Mental and spiritual greed is also an
aspect of this age, which exchanges the dominion
of one for that of another. Everywhere folks are
seeking, seeking eagerly to escape from the misery
of the present, and for us mortals there remains
but warfare—war against those near us, against
those among us, and against ourselves, and it is
our class especially which must wage war against
ourselves!”</p>

<p>Wenk then asked the Count whether he would not
spend the night with him, as it was now so late.</p>

<p>The Count answered involuntarily, “Yes, but
my wife....” Then he stopped, looking at
Wenk, and his face showed the return of his tormenting
thoughts. After a time he began again:
“You had caused me to forget my trouble,
Dr. Wenk! For this night I have robbed you of,
which you have devoted to me so sympathetically,
I shall eternally be in your debt. I cannot think
how I should have lived through it—alone! Now
it seems to be behind me, and I gratefully accept
your offer of a bed.”</p>

<p>“How would you like,” said Wenk to Count
Told next morning, “for me to see the Privy
Councillor and relate your story to him?”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_193">[193]</span>“I should be extremely glad if you would.”</p>

<p>He hesitated as if he wanted to say something
more. Wenk noticed it and waited. Then he
said, anticipating the other, “I am absolutely at
your service. If you have any other wish....”</p>

<p>The Count answered quickly, reddening as he
spoke, “Yes, I want to speak to my wife. When
I think of her I feel ... so ashamed!”</p>

<p>“You need not be ashamed!”</p>

<p>“My wife has such a strong and forceful idea of
life. It always seemed as if she found our life
together a somewhat feeble thing.... I wonder
whether it will be possible for her to go on
living with a husband who henceforth is but an
invalid.”</p>

<p>“I will see her, too,” said Wenk.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>The Privy Councillor received Wenk at once.
As amiably as he could, and in the pleasantly
sarcastic tone which distinguished him on all occasions,
he told Wenk that his opinion was that
the Count had been anxious to adventure something
that might raise him in his wife’s esteem. The
force of her personality stood far above his own,
and he hoped to attain to it by undertaking so
hazardous a scheme as to “pack” the cards and
win the game. It was not on account of the money,
he was convinced of that. He merely wanted to
exercise his imagination in adventure as his wife
did, but her strength of character always ensured
a safe way of escape. For the more feeble personality
the first attempt had ended in misfortune.
His phantasies had been excited by the current
stories of the thieving band of gambling cheats,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_194">[194]</span>
and the whole affair was mainly due to his neighbour
at the table, whose own desire for gain
influenced a weaker character and thus paved the
way to a society scandal.</p>

<p>“May I inquire, sir, who this neighbour was?”</p>

<p>“Ah, now that I have been so unamiable as to
speak of him thus, I cannot possibly betray him.
Moreover, he is the blameless head of a household,
a professor of physiology.”</p>

<p>“The matter is a great deal more serious than
you can have any idea of, sir. The Count spent
last night with me, driven to get away from himself.
He told me the story, down to the most
trifling detail, and I have no reason whatever to
suspect that he was misrepresenting the facts. He
was absolutely confounded and crushed by the
affair. It seemed as if it had been a failure of
intellectual force, a sudden inhibition of brain-control.
May there not have been someone among
your guests who exercised some special influence
on the Count?”</p>

<p>“No, there was no Futurist poet or painter
among them,” laughed the Privy Councillor.</p>

<p>“I beg you not to consider my questions importunate,
Councillor. You really are convinced that
no such person was present?”</p>

<p>“I do not believe there could have been any.
All my guests have been personally known to me
for some time. You know what the occasion of
our meeting was, don’t you? We were studying
the effect of hypnosis on a medium. There were
experts, professors, artists of repute, and some
personal friends in the company. Then there was
a Dr. Mabuse, whom I have not known very long,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_195">[195]</span>
but whose extraordinary success as a practitioner
I respect very highly. He practises psychotherapy.
And that reminds me. If Count Told’s state
is such as you describe it to be, we might see
what he can do for the Count, who is the son of
one of my very oldest friends, for I feel a great
deal of sympathy for him in his present position.
Tell him from me that I strongly advise his seeing
Dr. Mabuse, to whom I will give him a letter, for
I know his telephone number only.”</p>

<p>Wenk said farewell, and drove from the house
to Count Told’s villa at Tutzing, hoping that he
might find the Countess there, but he was told
by the footman that neither his master nor his
mistress had spent the night at home. Then he
returned to his own chambers, where the Count,
pale and haggard, waited eagerly for him.</p>

<p>“I felt sure of it,” he said disconsolately, when
Wenk told him that the Countess had not returned
home, “but one always hopes for the impossible.
And what about the Privy Councillor?”</p>

<p>“I told him exactly what you told me; he had
regarded the matter in another light, but not a
very serious one. He advises you to consult a
neurologist whom he knows, and has given me
this letter to him for you.”</p>

<p>“Dr. Mabuse,” read the Count. “Why, he
was at the party last night.”</p>

<p>“Shall I go to him?” suggested Wenk.</p>

<p>“No, Doctor, I really must not rely on your
kindness any longer. I must pull myself together
and deal with this crisis in my life. I will call
up Dr. Mabuse on the telephone, as we have his
number there. I will do it from here, if I may.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_196">[196]</span>“Dr. Mabuse,” said the Count at the telephone,
“you were present at Privy Councillor Wendel’s
party last night when I had the misfortune
to....”</p>

<p>“That is so.”</p>

<p>“I want your professional help. The Councillor
gave me a letter of introduction to you. Can I
bring it at once?”</p>

<p>The other voice answered harshly, “No. I do
not see patients except in their own homes.
What is your address? Expect me there to-morrow
morning at 11 a.m. Repeat the appointment;
what time is fixed?”</p>

<p>“Eleven a.m.,” said the Count, thoroughly terrified,
and then he left Wenk’s house.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_197">[197]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XIII</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> Countess opened her eyes on something black,
intersected with red circles and rays. All around
her was dark and strange. Somewhere on high a
faint light was glimmering in the room in which she
lay. She was on a sofa, fully dressed. She had
never seen the room before, and all its contents
were unfamiliar. She lay there, trying to recall
what had happened, but she found it impossible.
One moment alone stood out in her memory: the
recollection of the grey eyes of that Dr. Mabuse
who had told her of tigers—eyes which had held
her as with the clutch of a beast whose claws ran
blood. She recalled something like a spring in
the air, a hold that left her breathless, feeling as
if the very heart were being torn from her body
and she was sinking, sinking down into a gulf.</p>

<p>Suddenly a door opened; where, exactly, she
did not know, for she felt rather than perceived it.
She was expecting something, but her imagination
flowed back upon herself and she waited.</p>

<p>After a time a voice spoke out of the semi-darkness:
“You are awake. Would you like the
light?”</p>

<p>It was a voice which seemed to the Countess at
the first moment like the trump of doom, but in
an instant this sensation left her and she felt
incredulous. How came that voice into this<span class="pagenum" id="Page_198">[198]</span>
mysterious obscurity? It was the very last she
could have expected to hear. She shrank terrified
within herself, and it seemed as if her whole
body gradually stiffened. There was a sound in
her throat, but she was not conscious of it. She
stretched her hands in front of her as if warding
off a danger. Then suddenly the room was flooded
with light.</p>

<p>Dr. Mabuse closed the door and approached the
sofa. He said: “The situation is exactly what
I desired. I have brought you home!”</p>

<p>At these words the Countess regained control
of herself. She rose from the sofa, though she
felt faintness stealing over her. What did this
man want with her?—but indeed she knew what
he wanted. He was a tiger, intent on his prey.
Nevertheless, she asked him, “What do you
want?”</p>

<p>“I have just told you,” he answered curtly.</p>

<p>“And now?”</p>

<p>“You will remain with me.”</p>

<p>“I will not!” cried the Countess. “I will
go and help my husband!” And at that moment
she recollected clearly what had happened. Her
husband had cheated at cards. Oh, merciful
Heaven, she thought, how could such a thing have
happened? She knew so well how utterly foreign
to his nature such a thing would be. What misery,
what despair, what depths of misfortune! And
she herself had been with the woman who was an
accomplice in Hull’s murder, and had succumbed
to her power. Everything seemed to swim before
her eyes, and she saw her husband’s unconscious
act through a mist of blood.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_199">[199]</span>She heard the voice of the man beside her, stern
and threatening: “You will not? Have I asked
you whether you will?”</p>

<p>He had not asked the tiger or the buffalo. Was
he to ask a weak woman? Was he to ask <i>her</i>?
She, too, was his prey. This idea filled her with a
sort of voluptuous dread. She was the prey of
the strongest man whom she had ever known.
How could she defend herself? He had simply
taken her. Were there men whose will was strong
enough to give them possession of a woman if they
never even touched her?</p>

<p>“How did I come here?” she asked.</p>

<p>“We have something more important than that
to talk about,” he answered in a cold, harsh voice
that made her tremble. “How are you going to
adapt yourself to the situation?”</p>

<p>“I will never adapt myself to it!” she cried;
and it seemed as if instruments of torture were
engraven on her brain.</p>

<p>“That is not the question!” answered the voice,
falling like a stone, falling, lying, lying for thousands
of years. “The question is, are you going
to remain with me of your own free will or as my
prisoner?”</p>

<p>The Countess, now fully alive to the force and
compulsion which threatened her, strove to collect
her wits. She looked, listened, considered, and
slowly began to ask herself, “Shall it be cunning
or resistance?” After a time she answered,
“You cannot keep me as your prisoner in Munich.”</p>

<p>Mabuse replied roughly, “How do you know
that you are in Munich?”</p>

<p>“Have you run away with me?” she cried.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_200">[200]</span>“I am not a gorilla.”</p>

<p>“Who <i>are</i> you? What is your name?”</p>

<p>“Whatever you like to call me!”</p>

<p>“Then I shall call you a gorilla,” she was about
to retort angrily, but it seemed as if her tongue
refused to utter the hateful name. It would not
be expressed, and something within her appeared
to change and soften the situation, to promise
allurement in the distance and play around her
fancy like busy little elves of night. Yet something
in her conscience seemed to tell her that there
could be no ease for her while her husband was
cast down by misfortune and her own future was
so uncertain, and she spoke defiantly, “What do
you want with me?”</p>

<p>But the man looked at her long and steadily,
and she felt as if her question floated away,
minute and unconsidered as a trifle on the mighty
ocean. The ocean was the breast of the man
before her. There was no breast more mighty or
powerful; it represented what her inmost being
and her secret desires had yearned after. To rest
upon it, to rest ... as in the jungle....</p>

<p>Then, after he had looked at her in a silence
fraught with meaning, the man spoke. “The
human race is too contemptible and inferior to give
its men and women such force as nature has provided
for its other creations; that the one sex
should see, know and belong to the other as naturally
and inevitably as light belongs to day!”</p>

<p>“You mean to say,” said the Countess hesitatingly,
“that you love me, and that—is why you
have brought me here!”</p>

<p>“I desire you, and that—for me—is stronger<span class="pagenum" id="Page_201">[201]</span>
than love! You are here because there is no
resisting my desires. You may reign as a queen,
in this breast, and in my kingdom of Citopomar in
Southern Brazil. A queen ruling the virgin forest,
its savage beasts, savage and civilized human
beings, valleys, rocks and heights. Who in this
miserable continent can offer you more?”</p>

<p>“No one!” said the Countess, under the secret
dominion of the dream which had so rapidly begun
its twofold play in her spirit.</p>

<p>“You have decided, then, to remain of your own
free will?” asked Mabuse.</p>

<p>The Countess once more realized her position.
She shrank from him, and tried to shelter herself
behind the ottoman. She closed her lips firmly,
but at the same time she was torn by a conflict
within; she desired to go, and at the same time
she felt a yearning in some part of her being to
remain and to submit.</p>

<p>He continued: “If it were like this: a man and
a woman see each other for the first time, and in
the first glance that they exchange they say to
themselves, ‘There is nothing left to me of what
I was. Everything has vanished like a dissolving
view, and thou, the only one, thou alone remainest.
It is inconceivable that there should be a single
heart-beat that does not belong to thee.’ It is as
if all the races in all the ages had united their
powers in these two beings, instead of giving each
individual a beggarly portion of it. What a puny
creature is man, but if it were the other way with
the race he would be the image of God and of
creation!”</p>

<p>The Countess felt as if a sudden force was<span class="pagenum" id="Page_202">[202]</span>
stretching her between two poles. She knew
that she herself resembled both of them, and yet
they were unlike each other. “Must I proceed
from the one extreme to the other?” she asked
herself, feeling very weary, “or can I remain
hovering between them, calm and comfortable, in
the warm rays of a sunshine that steals over me
so pleasantly?”</p>

<p>There was always the inclination to follow the
extraordinary and unusual, that she might feel
wherein she was most akin to humanity, and yet
most herself when surrounded by what did not
belong to or affect her. And over her spirit there
stole again a feeling as of Paradise, the scent of the
Elysian Fields, the songs of enchanting sirens, and
it seemed as if the limits of her physical nature
were dissolved and, leaving her narrow horizon
behind her, she floated as if in ether. “What
is happening to me?” she thought, as, struggling
with herself, she advanced yet nearer to the vision
of Paradise which swam before her eyes.</p>

<p>The eyes of this strange, compelling being
flooded her like a spring season of sunshine.
He stood high as the clouds above her. The sunshine
overpowered the earth, but the earth yielded
itself gladly to its rays. Was that the secret of her
nature too? she herself asked. The season, now
wild and stormy, advanced like a monster endued
with power, from beyond the horizon, over the
forests, rivers, cities, mountains, looking neither
to right nor left and penetrating to the very heart
of things. “If this man overcomes me in such a
way, fills my whole being, is that indeed Paradise?
Is it for me completion, redemption, deliverance?<span class="pagenum" id="Page_203">[203]</span>
Is this my second nature which I have never yet
dared to follow?”</p>

<p>She desired to resist, but a subtle and enchanting
feebleness stole over her, and she felt herself
like a March field, dark and yielding. A jackdaw
was screeching in it, but somewhere or other a
thrush was singing behind her. And the screeching
jackdaw and the singing thrush were snatching at
a maggot, a living maggot in the bark of the tree,
and even the bark of the tree seemed to be awaiting
and expectant, and there was a murmuring sound
in its cells. And the thrush mounted high into
the air, singing triolets born of the spirit of the
soil....</p>

<p>Woman was the thrush, and at the same time
she was the maggot. She yielded herself to the
destroying force, and knew it not for the tumult
in her blood. She was stirred in her inmost being,
plunged into the depths and soared again, intangible
as an air-bubble.... Above her rose the
call of the man like the rustling sound of the
summer, calling the sap to rise, to push forward
the growth which should end in a glorious harvest.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_204">[204]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XIV</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Mabuse’s</span> visit to Count Told duly took place.
“Your neurosis is not by any means an unusual
one,” said the doctor. “It will be cured when
you regain control of yourself, but it will become
worse and finally be incurable if you don’t succeed
in doing that. It is a precursor of <i>dementia
præcox</i>. For professional reasons I shall treat
you in your own home, as I do all my patients.
I make one condition, however. As long as you
are undergoing treatment you must not leave the
house or see anyone who recalls your former life.”</p>

<p>Told was stupefied by the power and authority
which this doctor assumed towards him. Timid
and shrinking by nature, downcast by what had
occurred, he did not venture to make any objection,
and from the very first moment he stood in absolute
awe of him.</p>

<p>When Mabuse left the villa, in which he had
seen many things which revealed the life the Count
and his wife had led, he said to himself, “He
must be got rid of if she even mentions him again.”</p>

<p>The doctor was in a highly excitable and savage
state. The meeting with this man, who had so
long called her his own, had fired his blood and
inflamed him as if he had been a bull in the arena
transfixed by a javelin. He unconsciously lowered<span class="pagenum" id="Page_205">[205]</span>
his head as if for attack, and his imagination ran
riot, thirsting to satisfy his hate and revenge. It
seemed to him as if a tumour had suddenly burst
within him, scattering its evil and offensive discharge
everywhere, and he allowed himself to bathe
in its stream.</p>

<p>When he re-entered his house he went straight
to the room in which the Countess was confined.
It was in a secluded corner of the villa. The only
light there was came from a round window in its
arched and richly decorated dome.</p>

<p>The Countess arose as he came in. She was
white as the sheets upon her bed. She went
towards him, saying, “Something happened to me
in the night—something of which I was wholly unconscious.
What have you been doing to me?”</p>

<p>“Nothing but what you allowed me to do!”</p>

<p>Then the woman trembled so that she sank down
to the ground, raising her glance to his like an
animal that has been shot down, and crying in
horror, “You devil! oh, you devil!”</p>

<p>“That name pleases me,” said Mabuse. “I
consider it flattering. It is, without your realizing
it, a caress. Next time you will call me Lucifer,
for I shall bring you light!”</p>

<p>The Countess, lying in a heap on the floor, broke
into passionate sobs, crying in the midst of her
anguish, “Where is my husband?”</p>

<p>Then she saw that at the question Mabuse made
a gesture, so indifferent and trivial that she felt
her painful anguished appeal was no more than a
drop of dew vanishing in the sand, and as hopeless
to look for. And her downcast broken heart
asked itself whether this man could indeed be so<span class="pagenum" id="Page_206">[206]</span>
powerful that everything went down before his
will—that what she and others before her had been
must be brought to nought?</p>

<p>Once again she must yield herself to the twofold
stream within. It bore the most secret and
hitherto unsuspected currents along with it, and her
tortured imagination gave them full play. Must
not that which her blood sought to reveal to her be
true? She could not separate herself from this
new world of feeling. Resist and inveigh against
it as she might, she could yet not tear it from her.</p>

<p>The man stood silent before her, and his silence
seemed to threaten her. She thought that by a
word of her own she could destroy this threatening
attitude of his, but she found no power to say
anything more than to repeat helplessly, “Where
is my husband?” Then Mabuse, silently and
roughly, turned away.</p>

<p>When he had left her, leaving behind nothing
but the impression of his dominating will, she felt
as if she missed something in the room. She would
have preferred him to stand there still, and her
sense of isolation passed all bounds, overwhelming
her. A bottomless abyss opened before her, and
phantom figures made appealing gestures. But
she could not cast herself down; she hung on to
one slender rootlet; she knew it to be the tiny
remnant that remained to her of her former life.
She wished too, that even this rootlet might be
torn adrift, for she would rather have faced death
in its entirety than hover over the void.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Mabuse went backwards and forwards in his
room. He was like a caged beast, caught between<span class="pagenum" id="Page_207">[207]</span>
his rage for vengeance and lust of domination on
the one hand and the resistance raised to the
attainment of his goal on the other. That which
baffled him was such a trifle, merely the memories
binding a wife to the hours she has passed with
her husband, either alone or in company, and
because it was so slight an obstacle, the desire
to remove and destroy it utterly possessed him with
fury such as he had not known till now.</p>

<p>Spoerri entered. He was dressed as a soldier.
“What is that for?” asked Mabuse morosely, but
he did not wait for an answer, and asked about
George’s movements.</p>

<p>“He is at the villa in Schachen. He is very
cautious, and does not go out.”</p>

<p>“What is he doing there?”</p>

<p>“At night he helps to bring the store of cocaine
under the summer-house into Switzerland. I have
found something fresh which they are ready to take
there. Ether.”</p>

<p>“What is the ether for?”</p>

<p>“Folks are beginning to take it.”</p>

<p>“Who? What folks? Where?”</p>

<p>“Our folks, in Switzerland!”</p>

<p>“<i>Your</i> folks; how many have you?”</p>

<p>“We can get it to the others!”</p>

<p>“That reminds me of the girls you were
sending to Switzerland, to speed up the smuggling
of salvarsan. I don’t want to hear
anything about business matters. You understand,
nothing.”</p>

<p>“I won’t say any more about it.”</p>

<p>“Perhaps, Spoerri, there’ll be no need for that
sort of thing any more!”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_208">[208]</span>Then a hoarse cry was uttered by Spoerri. “Oh,
Doctor, Citopomar! Is it to be soon now?”</p>

<p>“We’ll drink to it, Spoerri, we’ll drink to it.
I don’t know. Let’s drink to the shepherd boy
with eighty-six thousand marks yearly income!”</p>

<p>“Oh, what have I out of it? Do I not always
invest it again in one or other of your enterprises,
Doctor?”</p>

<p>“Because it brings you in ten per cent. more
there than it would in an insurance society. Shall
I have to use force, shepherd? Drink, I say!”</p>

<p>Spoerri was the first to fall from his chair. He
lay on the floor, disorder all around him, gazing
sadly at his master. He lay there like a dog about
to die, knowing that he could no longer protect
his master’s life.</p>

<p>Mabuse, tottering so that he was obliged to hold
on to the edge of the table to save himself from
falling, stuttered: “Spoerri, do you think there is
anyone whose will is strong enough for him to
kill someone else without even touching him?”</p>

<p>But Spoerri did not understand him. He looked
up at his master with glassy eyes, stupid yet faithful,
troubled and sick.</p>

<p>“<i>I</i> can! and I shall do it, too!... Sleep,” he
said suddenly, and rising, he spurned the other with
his foot. He took a few steps forward, having to
seek support. Then he pulled himself together, and
his will-power was held as it were within an iron
vice. Rigidly upright, without a sign of swaying,
inflamed with drink and in a state of exaltation,
he went into the room the Countess occupied and
remained with her without saying a word. And
from that hour of humiliation this woman, too,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_209">[209]</span>
acknowledged his supremacy. She forgot her past,
forgot her very self, and submitted willingly to
her master.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>During the night Mabuse started for Lake
Constance. Just as he was approaching the villa
at Schachen, having extinguished his lights, he
narrowly missed a collision with the engine of the
steam-roller which was standing in the road a few
yards from the garden entrance. It was directly
in front of him when he applied his brakes, and he
therefore did not drive up to the house, but continued
along the road for another kilometre, then
left the car standing and went back to the house
by the shore-path.</p>

<p>“Why did you not tell me the steam-roller was
here?” he asked George imperiously. “Even a
match-box lying out in the street might betray us.
Go and fetch the car, quickly! It is on the highroad
near Wasserburg. Put it away and come
straight back here.”</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Next morning the telephone bell woke Wenk
from his sleep. “News from the steam-roller,”
he heard, and was at once wide awake.</p>

<p>“Yes, yes; please go on.”</p>

<p>“Last night about two o’clock a car arrived,
and pulled up directly in front of our engine, then
drove on again. As it was driving without lights, I
ordered Schmied to follow on a bicycle. He found
it about a kilometre further on, left alone by the
roadside, and came back at once to report. I stole
into the garden of the villa, but the dog began
barking and I went outside round the shore. I<span class="pagenum" id="Page_210">[210]</span>
saw a man come from the direction of the lake
and go into the house. When Schmied and I went
back to find the car it had vanished. There is
nothing to be noticed this morning!”</p>

<p>“Thanks. You can expect me there to-day.”</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>An hour before this conversation took place on
the telephone, while still dark, Mabuse left the
villa. He was wearing women’s clothes and
was rowed across to Nonnenhorn. A motor-boat
approached, and in it was a fisherman returning
from a smuggling expedition. Mabuse accosted
him, but the man said he was in a hurry, for he
must take his fish home. Then Mabuse at one
bound sprang into his boat, overpowered him, threw
him down and gagged him, and then transferred
him to the rowing-boat. He took off his female
garments, beneath which he was dressed as a
fisherman, and making a wide detour, he returned
to shore and went to the farm where in a barn
the car was concealed. George was lying in it
asleep.</p>

<p>After a long conversation with George, Mabuse
turned and drove back into Würtemberg, while
George returned to Schachen.</p>

<p>Mabuse wanted to get to Stuttgart. His agents
there had telephoned the previous day that a patient
wanted to consult him. That meant that they had
got hold of a rich man worth plucking.</p>

<p>While Mabuse was sitting at the gaming-table
that evening, he had a sudden vision of the steam-roller
as it appeared directly in front of him when
he applied his brakes. The huge machine was
outlined in the darkness, and it seemed as if it were<span class="pagenum" id="Page_211">[211]</span>
about to fall upon him, and to his fancy it took on
a strange shape, finally revealing the features of
the State Attorney. As he recalled it, it seemed
to stand forth like some antediluvian monster, bearing
Wenk’s face, about to fall upon and crush him.
Mabuse felt vaguely uneasy, and he suddenly left
the gaming-table, where he was losing, and drove
back in the night to Munich. On the way this
action of his seemed ridiculous, and he felt as if
his impulse had been unwarranted. “My desire
for that woman will conquer any fear of that
accursed lawyer,” he thought, but yet Wenk
seemed to stand in his way, more powerful than
ever. Why was he still there? Had Mabuse’s
order not been distinct enough? If not, he would
repeat it!</p>

<p>When once again in his house at Munich he
went straight to bed. He controlled his desire to
go to the Countess, and fell fast asleep at once.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>When the road-menders in Schachen returned to
work after their midday rest, a man who had come
out of the inn attached himself to their party,
saying that he wanted to speak to the overseer.
Was it likely he could find a job? he asked them.</p>

<p>“You can have mine this minute, if you’ll pay
for it well,” said one jokingly, but the man said
that he only wanted the work so that he could
get some pay himself. “That’s another matter,”
laughed the navvy. “There’s the overseer standing
there.”</p>

<p>The man went towards him, speaking in a low
tone, and unobtrusively drew him somewhat away
from the rest. Yes, he could possibly get a job,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_212">[212]</span>
said the overseer, who was really a police inspector;
let him show his papers.</p>

<p>These the man brought out, saying, “Do not
show yourself surprised, inspector. Look as if
you were reading the papers through, and take me
on to help the stoker on the engine. He is Sergeant
Schmied, isn’t he?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir.... Well, all right, I’ll take you
on,” said the inspector aloud. “We can give
you some work. Come this way. Schmied,” he
called out. He explained to Schmied in an undertone
that the State Attorney was going to spend
the day on the engine as stoker’s assistant.</p>

<p>“What have you noticed now?” asked Wenk
of Schmied, as the road-engine moved backwards
and forwards.</p>

<p>“While you were on the way, the inspector
telephoned to you, but you had already started.
Things seem very strange here. We saw the man
go to the villa that night, and we thought he
must be the one who had left the car standing in
the road, but yet it doesn’t seem to tally with the
rest, for when we came back to the car it had
disappeared. Early this morning there was a
woman in a rowing-boat on the lake near the
villa, but we could not be sure whether she actually
came from there. An hour later, Poldringer, the
man we are watching, came from the highroad and
went into the house; but we had never seen him
leave it, and that is very curious.”</p>

<p>“You have no idea whether the villa has some
unknown exit?”</p>

<p>“No, for hitherto our observations of Poldringer
all tally. He used to return the same way he<span class="pagenum" id="Page_213">[213]</span>
went out. He scarcely ever leaves the place, not
once in three days.”</p>

<p>“Is there no way of getting into the villa?”</p>

<p>“Not without exciting attention. I see that
by the way tramps are turned away. They
have a well-trained bloodhound there.... It
would not be possible to effect a secret entrance.”</p>

<p>“Is Poldringer still there?”</p>

<p>“Yes; I saw him at a window just now.”</p>

<p>“Had the car a number-plate?”</p>

<p>“Yes, the Constance district; here is the
number.”</p>

<p>“That, of course, is a false one. It came from
the Lindau direction, I think you said?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir. I telephoned the number to Friedrichshafen,
Ravensburg, Lindau, Wangen and Constance.
From Constance they told me that the
number I gave belonged to a car in use by
the Sanitary Commissioners which never left
Constance.”</p>

<p>“Isn’t it possible that the car had been expected
at the villa, but did not stop at it, either because
they wanted to use it again shortly or because
something had made them a bit suspicious—the
steam-roller, for example?... and therefore
Poldringer was told to wait for the car in the
street and take it to some place of concealment?
During that time the man who had brought it here
arrived at the villa. He is either still there with
Poldringer or else he was the woman in the rowing-boat,
and he has driven to the place where
the car is. We must find out where they keep it
hidden.”</p>

<p>“We often hear the sound of a motor-boat at<span class="pagenum" id="Page_214">[214]</span>
night not far from the shore, but we are not
able to keep an eye on it.”</p>

<p>“I shall sleep in the trolly with you to-night,
and we will stop the roller half a kilometre further
away from the house. Is there any suitable place
to hide in near the house?”</p>

<p>“Yes.”</p>

<p>“Then we’ll go together. Is that settled? All
right, then; now I’m going to learn how to
lay out the stones. Hitherto, I’ve only laid
out criminals!” laughed Wenk.</p>

<p>“Yes, your honour,” said Schmied cheerily, as
he released the throttle and started the engine.
“Will your honour please to stoke up!” And
Wenk heaped more coal into its glowing maw.</p>

<p>“Up to now your honour has never fired an
engine, only criminals!” he continued, carrying
on Wenk’s joke.</p>

<p>“Yes, but not enough of those, as you see at
the villa, my good Schmied,” answered the lawyer.
“However, I hope with your help....”</p>

<p>“We shall catch them all right,” said Schmied
eagerly.</p>

<p>“If we don’t overreach ourselves, for I think
we are dealing at the moment with the most dangerous
and daring gang in Europe. You know
that we have ascertained so far that it is a case
of card-sharping, murder, terrorization, and all of
it done by the help of a gang.”</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed,” said Schmied.</p>

<p>As they were leaving the trolly that evening
Schmied whispered: “I should like to draw your
attention to something, sir. Every evening I go
by as if I were taking a little rest after the day’s<span class="pagenum" id="Page_215">[215]</span>
work, and I light up my pipe. Just at the side
there, you see, we are getting to a little door.
Whenever anyone goes by, the dog begins barking,
and I couldn’t help thinking there was some
reason for it, but one can’t find it out from the
street. You see now, I am just close to it, and
while I am going by I fasten ... (just listen
to the dog now!) a thread across the door. Anybody
who opens it would break the thread, but he
would not notice it when going through. In this
way I can keep watch over the door, even when
it is not actually in view. Then I can tell whether
anyone has gone through the gate in the dark.
In the morning I go and look at it first thing,
and take the thread away.”</p>

<p>“Is it there already?”</p>

<p>“I have just fastened it there.”</p>

<p>“Then you did it very smartly, for I did not
notice anything,” said Wenk, praising him.</p>

<p>“Let us go back. It really is a side-entrance to
the other villa.”</p>

<p>“Do you know who is living there?”</p>

<p>“For the last thirty years an old maid has
been living there. There certainly is no connection
between the two villas.”</p>

<p>They strolled back along the road.</p>

<p>“If you would like to go to sleep, Schmied, I
have no objection. I know what I’ve to look
out for now.”</p>

<p>“Well, I really should be glad to, sir, for last
night I got no sleep, and I must be out there again
before four o’clock.”</p>

<p>“I understand. Well then, good-night....”</p>

<p>Wenk continued his patrol throughout the whole<span class="pagenum" id="Page_216">[216]</span>
of the spring night, but nothing happened, and
he noticed nothing out of the common. Next
morning he repaired to the hotel at Lindau, the
address of which he had notified before leaving
Munich. The director told him he had been rung
up from Munich, and his man wanted him to know
that Count Told most earnestly desired to speak
to him as soon as possible. The call had come
from his home at Munich. He seemed to be
greatly agitated, and begged the man to telephone
the message on.</p>

<p>Wenk returned to Munich and rang up the
Count, but an unfamiliar voice informed him that
the Count had started on a journey.</p>

<p>“Did he leave no message for me?” said Wenk.</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“Where has he gone?”</p>

<p>“He left no address. Please ring off.”</p>

<p>Wenk was thoroughly perplexed.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_217">[217]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XV</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">That</span> same morning Mabuse had visited Told.
“You are not so well, I can see,” said he to him.
“Your pupils are very much dilated.”</p>

<p>“Is that a sign...?” said Told hesitatingly.</p>

<p>“Yes. Don’t talk about your state; put it
entirely out of your head. Where is your wife?”</p>

<p>The startled Count could not venture on an
answer.</p>

<p>“Your wife did not want to live with you any
more—never any more!” went on the Doctor
harshly. “That is so, isn’t it? You must destroy
the past, break off all relation to it. Call your
man here!”</p>

<p>Told rang, and the man came. The Count, with
a gesture, referred him to the doctor.</p>

<p>“Has anybody telephoned?”</p>

<p>“No, Doctor.”</p>

<p>“Has anyone rung up from here?”</p>

<p>“I did,” answered Told.</p>

<p>“Whom?”</p>

<p>“Dr. von Wenk.”</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>“I wanted to speak to him.”</p>

<p>“What did you want to say?”</p>

<p>The embarrassed Count answered, “Only ...<span class="pagenum" id="Page_218">[218]</span>
to speak ... to speak to some human being or
other!”</p>

<p>“Is your servant a bullock, then, or am I one?”
asked Mabuse harshly. “You can talk to me if
you want to. What crazy idea has got into your
head?”</p>

<p>The Count turned his head away; he no longer
had the courage to face his doctor.... “Is
he going to cure me?” he asked himself. Then
he looked up at him timidly and irresolutely. “You
are no human being: you are a devil!” was the
secret cry of his heart, but these fierce thoughts
soon left him, and he felt suddenly sleepy. “I
am always so tired!” he exclaimed.</p>

<p>“Tell your man now, in my presence, to refuse
all visitors or anyone who telephones. He must
say, ‘The Count has gone on a journey. He left
no address. Please ring off.’”</p>

<p>Slowly and mechanically Told repeated the order,
and the man bowed and withdrew.</p>

<p>“I am really not sure whether I shall go on
with your case,” said Mabuse. But Told hardly
heeded him; he seemed to feel a slow poison
stealing into his veins.</p>

<p>“You are thirsty!” said Mabuse, suddenly.</p>

<p>“Yes, I am,” whispered the Count.</p>

<p>“You are to drink a mixture of brandy and
Tokay, as much as you like. Take good long
draughts—the brandy will do you good. You must
forget everything in your past, your wife as well.
When you are convinced that you have succeeded in
doing that, you are on the road to recovery. You
must destroy the past, you understand. The
alcohol will help you there.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_219">[219]</span>“Destroy the past,” stammered the Count, as
if sinking into a bog that threatened to engulf
him, “destroy ... the ... past....”</p>

<p>“In two years’ time you can think about
resuming your ordinary life again. In what time?”
he broke off suddenly. “What time did I say?”
he thundered.</p>

<p>The Count aroused himself from his lethargy.
Horrified at the length of time involved, he
answered in a low tone, “Two years.”</p>

<p>“Do you know that your wife wants to put
you into a lunatic asylum? She is getting the
State Attorney, Wenk, to help her. Was not
that the man who rang you up?... I am
coming again to-morrow.”</p>

<p>The Count remained alone, dejected and humiliated.
It seemed as if elephants were trampling
out his brains, that his spirit was a prey to crocodiles
and he was covered with mud and slime.
“The whole world has forsaken me,” he murmured.
The pictures he had collected around him
seemed to be celebrating orgies on the walls. He
could no longer understand how it was they could
ever have pleased him, nor why he had endured
them so long. He took a hunting-knife and slit
every one of them from top to bottom, hacking at
their frames. When he had done it, he sprang
back in horror. He held his head in his hands,
groaning, “Oh God, am I really mad?”</p>

<p>He began drinking brandy, and he drank it out
of a claret tumbler. When he had had three
glasses he was intoxicated. Then it seemed as if
the doctor had left something behind him and
that this lay in front of him. He did not know<span class="pagenum" id="Page_220">[220]</span>
what it was, but he tried to grasp it, and then
suddenly it had jumped to his head. It seemed
like a wedge fastened there, fitting tightly between
the two halves of the brain. Fear seized upon him
and tore his courage to shreds. “Doctor, Doctor,”
he shouted, and he heard his voice re-echo in the
empty rooms. The world was so wide, yet he
was alone. And then he became unconscious.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Karstens succumbed to his wounds, and again
the public imagination busied itself with the death
of a second victim. Wenk found himself in a
difficulty and decided one day to make a final
appeal to the dancer. He went to her cell.</p>

<p>“I am not going to speak to you,” said Cara
when she perceived him.</p>

<p>Wenk took no notice, and said in a troubled
tone, his hopes disappearing: “Do you know that
the beautiful lady who was always looking on at
the play at Schramm’s has disappeared?”</p>

<p>“Not the one you sent to me in prison?”
answered the dancer instantly.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Wenk, and it was not till he had
uttered the word that he perceived the significance
of this admission. It was all very mysterious. Had
the Countess revealed her errand to Cara, and was
she in league with the gamblers? It seemed
incredible, but yet how strange it was that Cara,
who would not at first speak to him, at once gave
him her attention when he mentioned the Countess.
Wenk did not want Cara to think that he was
astonished at this, and went on talking, while he
was trying to consider how he could best arrive at
the secret; but he did not stop to reflect upon<span class="pagenum" id="Page_221">[221]</span>
the ideas that came uppermost. In the course of
the conversation he hazarded a conjecture that had
often occurred to him when he thought of Cara’s
connection with the criminal, but which he had
never mentioned till now. He said, “You are
sacrificing yourself for this criminal because you
could not make up your mind to part from him.”</p>

<p>Then Cara sprang up, staring at Wenk as if
convulsed. He looked her right in the eyes, and
noticed that an expression of overwhelming horror
stood in them, and was clearly written upon her
distorted features.</p>

<p>“Well?” he asked, encouraged and hopeful.</p>

<p>But Cara remained as if frozen in her stony
attitude.</p>

<p>Then he ventured further. “If we came to
some agreement, I could make proposals that would
be to your advantage.”</p>

<p>Slowly the dancer recovered from the horror that
had seized upon her. For the last three years, ever
since Mabuse had repulsed her, her life had been a
story of self-sacrificing martyrdom and devoted
adherence to the man who had wrought her ruin
and driven her to crime. Not for a single instant
had she thought of betraying him, of refusing her
allegiance. Indelibly stamped upon her whole
nature like the brand of a slave was the feeling
that mastery and might such as his could never
be contested. And now, through Wenk’s words,
she beheld this man whom she adored threatened
with danger. What did the State Attorney know,
and how had he obtained his knowledge? Had
the Countess betrayed her after all? Slowly she
evolved a plan by which to discover how much the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_222">[222]</span>
lawyer knew. She might possibly convey a warning
to Dr. Mabuse, and at the thought her blood
was fired and the delicious sensation of feeling
herself his deliverer, and perhaps, too, regaining
the ascendancy she had lost, stole over her. No,
it could not be, she dared not even conceive of it;
to save him from danger would be enough for her,
to know him secure would be bliss. Finally she
said, “Since you seem to be better informed than
I imagined, I will speak, but you must give me
two days to think it over.”</p>

<p>The dancer had learnt from the warder that
someone had been inquiring about her, and from
the description given she believed it to be Spoerri.
She would therefore have an opportunity of telling
him about her interview with Wenk and warning
him of what might occur.</p>

<p>“Very well,” said Wenk, relieved. Then he
thought he would clinch the matter, and as his
previous supposition seemed to have hit the mark,
he imagined it a favourable opportunity to inflame
her imagination still further, so he said, “I am
trying to get on the track of the Countess; she
seems to be in hiding with your friend.”</p>

<p>He was so ashamed of these words, however,
that he blushed as he uttered them, recalling with
painful intensity his few meetings with the missing
lady—meetings which had bound him so closely
to her. But the effect of his words on the dancer
was wholly unexpected. She fell back on her
pallet, sobbed aloud, tried to speak, but could
utter no word, and then she clenched her fists and
raised them despairingly to her brow.</p>

<p>Wenk went off quickly, thinking it best not to<span class="pagenum" id="Page_223">[223]</span>
disturb this attitude of mind but to let her yield
wholly to its influence. As he opened the door
a man stumbled against it, but it was only the
warder, who had come, as he said, to look at the
prisoner as his duty was just at this time. “All
right,” said Wenk, and he made his way out.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Shortly afterwards the following things occurred.
Near Hengnau, on the borders of Würtemberg,
a man was detained and arrested as he was about
to drive cattle to Würtemberg. At first he pretended
to be dumb, but afterwards he raged
furiously at his capture. The examining counsel,
in order to intimidate him, said one day, “You
had better confess before the new law is passed.
If you are tried before then you may get off lightly,
but later on it may cost you your head.”</p>

<p>“What new law is that?” asked the man.</p>

<p>“The crime of endangering the food distribution
is punishable with death.”</p>

<p>“What sort of death?”</p>

<p>“Probably hanging!”</p>

<p>“And if I am convicted before that is passed?”</p>

<p>“You won’t get more than a year’s imprisonment
at the most.”</p>

<p>Then he suddenly confessed, and his confession
opened many doors. He confessed all that he had
been doing for years and gave the names of all
the profiteers known to him. Many arrests were
the result. Every day afforded fresh opportunities,
and finally one day the name of the man whom
Mabuse had dismissed on the highroad to Lindau—Pesch—was
mentioned.</p>

<p>Pesch was arrested, and his first night in prison<span class="pagenum" id="Page_224">[224]</span>
was spent at Wangen, which was his native place.
When the warder entered his cell next morning,
the prisoner had disappeared. A few hours later
a telephone message came to the Wangen police.
In a wood on the highroad to Lindau a man was
lying dead. It was undoubtedly a case of murder.</p>

<p>An inquiry took place on the spot. The dead
man was Pesch. He had been stabbed, and as
they raised his body they saw on the large white
stone on which it had rested certain signs which
had been written in blood. The very same day
experts deciphered these signs. They stood for
“Villa Elise.”</p>

<p>The mayors in the neighbouring districts were
asked whether they knew a villa bearing this name,
and thus it was soon ascertained that at Schachen
there was a villa so called, and it was under
police surveillance.</p>

<p>Wenk was at once informed, and he drove to
Lindau. The two detectives who were in charge
of the steam-roller had ascertained that Poldringer
had left Schachen on a bicycle the very day that
Pesch was imprisoned, and had not returned until
three o’clock the next morning.</p>

<p>Then Wenk arranged that two motor-boats
should be stationed on the lake. They were
made to appear as if they were Customs’ official
boats, and were provided with searchlights.</p>

<p>Another human life had been sacrificed, but
this fresh murder had revealed something more
far-reaching and dangerous than had yet been
suspected. It was certain that the gang was taking
part in this profiteering movement also, and it
became clear that its leader had created an entire<span class="pagenum" id="Page_225">[225]</span>
yet invisible State to carry on his purposes and
give effect to the deeds his will imposed on his
fellows.</p>

<p>Pesch left a wife and five children, and since
the family breadwinner was gone, they were
in absolute danger of starving. Then Wenk sought
out Edgar Hull’s father, to obtain help for them,
and the idea suddenly occurred to him, “Why
not establish an educational institution, a real
home-school for the children of criminals, taking
them in under an assumed name? Perhaps that
would be a good way to lay out your money.
The children, who so often inherit the parents’
characteristics, could be watched over and perhaps
influenced for good in their early years. If it
were not possible to eradicate their vices, at least
they could be kept apart from their fellows and
removed before they have a chance of harming
them. In this way a large proportion of the
criminal class might be rendered harmless and
many people would be saved....”</p>

<p>“I will do it,” said Hull, “and I am grateful
to you for the suggestion.”</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>The next evening Wenk was walking from the
Marstall to the Maximilianstrasse, and as he passed
the Four Seasons Hall he thought he saw someone
he knew in the crowd in front of him struggling
to gain an entrance; but he could not recall
who it was, and went straight ahead. As he
walked on he strove to remember whose back
and shoulders it was that had seemed so familiar,
but he could not place the individual. Soon afterwards
he came to an advertisement window in<span class="pagenum" id="Page_226">[226]</span>
which the scheme of a popular lottery was displayed.
The large letters could be seen through
the dusty pane, and the words “Lucky Chance”
stood out. These words at once gave Wenk the
clue he had been seeking. The back he had
noticed belonged to the sandy-bearded gambler.</p>

<p>He was astounded at the discovery. He had
been seeking this man for many days and nights
all over Germany, and here he was, and he had
passed so close by him that he could have touched
him on the shoulder. He turned round at once,
went back to the hall and at the entrance he read
a notice stating that Dr. Mabuse was giving a
lecture, with experiments, there that evening.</p>

<p>He immediately ordered one of the constables
standing outside to fetch six plain-clothes men
and tell them to close all the exits without exciting
any attention, and when the detectives were placed,
he entered the hall. It was an easy one to search,
and he went from row to row, while the lecturer
was engaged in preparing his experiments. Wenk
took up a position here and there, and looked
at the folks one after another. But nowhere did
he find the owner of the back which was so
impressed on his mind.</p>

<p>He noticed some of his acquaintance. There
was Privy Councillor Wendel sitting in the front
row, and a legal colleague of his was there with
his wife and grown-up daughter, but he behaved
as if he saw nobody and continued his eager
search. It was all in vain, however. Then he
took a sudden resolve, went outside again, and
gave the detectives the following orders. All the
exits were to be locked except one. Two detectives<span class="pagenum" id="Page_227">[227]</span>
were to enter the hall, and one of them was to
go on to the platform at once and request the
audience to leave the hall quietly, one by one. Both
were to see that there was no one left behind.
The four others were to stand at the folding doors
and let the people pass through singly, only one
half of the door being opened.</p>

<p>Wenk himself would stand by the door, and
if he gave any order for arrest, two of the detectives
would at once take the man aside and handcuff
him. The two others would then only have to
take care that no one got near the man arrested.
All were to have their service revolvers ready
for use. There was great excitement in the hall
when the announcement was made, and several
cries of disapproval of the order were heard.
The detective strove to pacify the disappointed
audience.</p>

<p>Mabuse’s first thought, when he heard the Secret
Service agent’s announcement, was a doubt whether
he should have ventured on this public appearance,
but he soon dismissed the troublesome idea.
Yes, he had been right, for it provided him,
in concentrated form, with the nourishment upon
which his mind battened. With such hypnotic
powers as he possessed he must always be in
relation with a larger and unknown public. To
feel his power over the narrow circle to which
his professional duties bound him, the members
of which were known to him, was not enough
for his insatiable ambition. His sphere must know
no limits, and with these weird and mysterious
gifts of his he could exploit the triviality and
credulity of his fellows and at the same time<span class="pagenum" id="Page_228">[228]</span>
give full play to his hatred and his lust for
domination.</p>

<p>Upon such a stage as this he felt as if born
anew. It was here that he had inaugurated his
reign of power, when the war sent him from his
South Sea plantations back to his home, a ruined
man, and this domination of his he could not
renounce. While these thoughts were passing
through his mind he went to the detective and
asked what had happened. “You must inquire
of the State Attorney, sir,” said the man.
“Dr. von Wenk is just outside.”</p>

<p>Mabuse turned pale and walked away, going
rapidly towards the Privy Councillor, whom he
saw still sitting in the front row. As he went,
he felt in his pocket to make sure that his revolver
was safe, and sensations of hatred and defiance
went through his whole body, fastening as it were
like a brand upon his mental image of Wenk.</p>

<p>“First of all you, and then ...” he said to
himself, but he was already smiling in the
Councillor’s face.</p>

<p>“Your hypnotic powers,” said the latter, “seem
to be giving the State Attorney some trouble!”</p>

<p>“Is that Dr. Wenk?” said Mabuse, drawing
back as if astonished.</p>

<p>“I saw him just now going from seat to seat
and fixing an eagle eye on everybody here, as
if to pierce through coat, waistcoat and shirt to
reach a guilt-burdened conscience. He does not
seem to have found his man, however.”</p>

<p>Mabuse’s breast heaved, inflated at the thought
of his success. He felt like a horse in sight of
its manger after a long and weary road. Although<span class="pagenum" id="Page_229">[229]</span>
he clearly understood what the words implied,
he nevertheless asked the Councillor, “How do
you know that?”</p>

<p>“It is quite simple, for if he had found his
man, he would have let one of the detectives
take him out without disturbing your lecture.”</p>

<p>“That is true,” said Mabuse. “Let us go.”</p>

<p>He pressed towards the door, taking the
Councillor with him. He was thoroughly on the
alert, looking behind him to see that he did not
lose touch with Wendel, and also ahead, where
lay the danger he wished to avoid. Whenever
any movement threatened to separate him from
the elderly savant, he used all the cunning at
his command to get near him again. It was
above all essential not to leave the hall exposed
to Wenk’s gaze as a solitary individual. The
Councillor, who was old and well known, must
help him to throw the hound off the scent. He
was aged, however, and could not hurry; but
Mabuse dared not be the last one to leave, closely
eyed as he would be by a disappointed man who
had not found the quarry he sought. There were
still some others behind him, to whose party he
might attach himself, so that he need not be
the last.</p>

<p>One thing was certain. It was he, and none
other, whom the State Attorney was seeking,
but Wenk did not know that Mabuse was his
quarry, or he would have had him arrested on
the platform. How had he got upon the track?
Was it a mere guess that had started him off?
Was there treachery in it? No; <i>he</i> would never
be betrayed. Could Wenk have recognized him,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_230">[230]</span>
one of those evenings at the gaming-table? No;
it was impossible, his disguises were too perfect
for that, so....</p>

<p>Then a hand touched his, and Mabuse looked
into Spoerri’s inquiring eyes, and saw beside him
another man of his bodyguard, and he immediately
looked away again unconcernedly. Spoerri and
his accomplice were pressing towards the exit in
front of him. Mabuse went on thinking, and
came to the conclusion that mere chance had
put Wenk on this track, some faint resemblance
or recollection, some movement or action....
In any case, Wenk must see as little of him as
possible, and since his back would be exposed to
him longer than any other part, he put his arms
through the sleeves of his overcoat and thus altered
his appearance.</p>

<p>And now he had reached the exit with the
Privy Councillor. He quickly pushed him in front,
following closely on his heels. At the moment
when Wendel stepped to the door, Wenk was
ordering a detective to tell two men who were
lingering on the stairs to move on. Mabuse heard
the man say, “Shall I arrest them?” Then he
looked ahead and saw that the order referred
to Spoerri and his subordinate. Mabuse sought
to catch his eye; he took his pocket-handkerchief
out with a flourish and blew his nose loudly.
Spoerri saw it and understood, and at once withdrew
with his companion.</p>

<p>Mabuse saw Wenk shaking hands with the
Councillor. Then it was his turn to come forward,
and Wendel introduced “Dr. Mabuse.” Without
taking his eyes off the door, through which<span class="pagenum" id="Page_231">[231]</span>
the light from the hall was now streaming, Wenk
shook hands with Mabuse, saying courteously,
“You won’t be annoyed with me for carrying
out my duty, I hope, Doctor?”</p>

<p>Mabuse answered with affected friendliness, his
hand on the revolver in his pocket, “Certainly
not; I must naturally take the second place when
it is a question of the good of the community,
whom you are endeavouring to rid of a criminal.”</p>

<p>He had already passed on. Wenk nodded to
him, but did not look round again, as his gaze
was still fastened on the door.</p>

<p>The Privy Councillor took Mabuse’s arm going
downstairs. Mabuse accompanied him to the
gentlemen’s cloakroom and then took his leave.
One of his cars was waiting in the Maximilianstrasse,
and right and left of him at the entrance
to the <i>foyer</i> his people were standing in readiness
for anything that might happen. Spoerri had
taken up his position at the main door of the
hall, to keep watch upon the stairs; then he
went out behind Mabuse, and the others, who
were in small detached groups, always ready to
close up at a word, followed them. It was not
until Mabuse had taken his seat in the car and
driven off that they dispersed, each going a
separate way.</p>

<p>Driving homeward, Mabuse reflected that he
had committed one act of folly. He ought at
any rate to have asked when he would be allowed
to give his experiments. This fact depressed him,
and he felt that he had failed in some way. He
would never have done anything so foolish formerly,
and the idea occurred to him that perhaps his<span class="pagenum" id="Page_232">[232]</span>
power was on the decline, and that it was now
time for Citopomar.</p>

<p>Then suddenly he shouted aloud, “No! this is
due to that woman! Wenk wants to hang me, the
woman makes me feel old, and she is delivering
me over to the gallows.” Why should this woman,
young and beautiful as she was, who had abandoned
herself to her lot with despairing fatalism, make
him feel old? Her abandonment of herself was
like wine to him, and this idea started another
train of thought. He was in conflict with himself.
There was no enjoyment in the thought that he
had escaped a great danger, and in the midst of
his uneasy reflections he had a sudden breathless
conviction that she made him feel old because
he loved her. Then he felt a hatred of himself,
gathering into one mighty heap all the fierce and
bitter hatred he had cherished for others and
pouring it out on himself. So strongly did he
suffer from the burden of these chaotic feelings
that his brain grew giddy. But now he had
reached his house.</p>

<p>All the wrinkles in his face were deepened
and intensified, but it was his eyes that looked
most dreadful, and the Countess trembled as he
entered her room. No longer were they of the
steely grey of an agate, but rather seemed shot
with rays of copper colour.</p>

<p>“What has happened?” she asked.</p>

<p>Then he told her something quite different from
that which he had meant to tell her.</p>

<p>“Do you know who I am?” he asked, and
his tone was one of frenzied delirium. “I am
a werwolf; I suck man’s blood. Every day my<span class="pagenum" id="Page_233">[233]</span>
hatred burns up all the blood in my veins, and
every night I fill them again by sucking the blood
of some human being. If men caught me, they
would tear me into little bits. I will bite through
your white throat, you tormenting witch!”</p>

<p>The Countess started as if stung, and, mad
with pain and torture, cried aloud, “Kill me then!
What could be better than death?”</p>

<p>“But I love you!” cried the voice of the
man beside her, who seemed to be possessed by
devils.</p>

<p>The woman hid her face in her hands. It
was the first time she had heard such a confession
from that imperious mouth, and it stirred
her to the depths of her nature. Her free spirit
had been snatched from the world and confined
in a fortress whence there was no escape. Her
life was a dead thing, but the blood within her
raged in dread and mysterious tumult, inflamed
and excited by the power of this man. Her dead
soul was afire, and there was nothing left to
consume: whence then came this flame?</p>

<p>Mabuse left the Countess without saying another
word. “I have told her enough,” he said to
himself. He threw himself down on his bed,
but could not sleep. He felt as if something
new had come into his life, till then so steady
and changeless, as if the danger which he had
always been able to grasp and bring to nought
had eluded him and were sinking into the icy
black gulf in whose depths his life and actions
were grounded. For hours he tried to grapple
with this new force and subordinate it to his
will, but evermore it seemed to evade him.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_234">[234]</span>Then he returned to the Countess, lying fully
dressed and sleepless on her bed, and he said,
“We must talk matters out. Our fates are entwined,
and we must go through life together.
From some source or other of my existence my
blood has received something which revolts against
a peaceful and well-ordered life, and will not
permit to others a power above its own. Thus
it is that I have become, as it were, the chief of
a robber horde. I have known but two states:
the desire to dominate and the necessity to hate!
But now you have come upon the scene. At
first I thought that your spirit would be consumed
in the twin flames that inspire mine, but it is
not so. Hundreds have been consumed by them,
but you seem to feed upon them, and they nourish
you. When I am intoxicated, not forgetting my
hatred, but putting it on one side for the time
being, because there are more beautiful things,
I often name to you one name—Citopomar. Citopomar
is not the outcome of a disordered fancy,
the result of a fit of intoxication. It is a virgin
forest in Brazil, far in the interior. It is being
cultivated for me. All the money I can wring
from this petty community of miserable wretches
on this side of the world is being employed there.
There is my country, the land in which I shall
end my days. First of all, I thought of myself
there with my harem. Now I know it is there
I shall be with <i>you</i>. It is a forty days’ journey
to the nearest human dwelling, and the human
beings there could not endure life here, but they
cannot be reached, for the Botocudos would not
let anyone pass. It is even possible that my<span class="pagenum" id="Page_235">[235]</span>
agents, who have been carrying out my plans,
may have deceived me, and that when we arrive
there we may find there is no kingdom of Citopomar.
But no one can deceive me about <i>you</i>!</p>

<p>“My professional life here has extended to ever-widening
circles, and I could live a good deal
longer under the protection of the State and in
well-ordered society. To-day, however, I had proof
that folks are on my track, and henceforth I
must act cautiously. A ship is being built for
me in Genoa. I do not travel by strange ships,
but sail under my own flag. The ship is to be
ready on the 1st of June, and on that night we
will embark. Between this and then, however,
there is nearly two months to pass. I cannot
rest, and until the very night of our departure
I shall still be a robber chief.</p>

<p>“We will be wary. You must go to another
house. It is quite as well guarded as this one,
but if they should discover this one, they will
catch you. I am probably about to leave the
place, and at midnight to-morrow you will depart.
Spoerri will take you to the new home.”</p>

<p>As incapable of resistance as of mental participation
in his schemes, consumed in the devouring
flames of this man’s all-powerful domination, the
Countess endured his conversation and took his
orders. Her fate lay in his hands.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_236">[236]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XVI</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">At</span> nine o’clock next morning Mabuse was at
Count Told’s villa. As he was now endeavouring
to hold himself ready for flight at any moment,
he wanted to bring this matter of the Count to
an end.</p>

<p>He had desired him to drink, and for some
days now Told had been drinking, in passionate
abandonment. Mabuse looked at him in silence.
When Told was intoxicated he said to him, “You
are a person without the slightest power of resistance.
Where is your razor?”</p>

<p>In a thick voice Told answered that it was
on the washstand.</p>

<p>“Is it sharp?” said Mabuse with a peculiar
intonation. “Sharp enough?” he repeated with
an emphasis so marked that it seemed as if he
wanted to hammer an idea into the Count’s head.</p>

<p>Mabuse took it up, seized a sheet of paper
and made a sharp clean cut in it. Then he said
threateningly, “Yes, it is sharp enough.” Thereupon
he laid the razor aside, but did not return
it to its case. He called the servant in, saying
to him, “The Count’s condition is not so good
as it was. He is drinking brandy with his Tokay.
I have no objection to a little light Burgundy,
but these strong spirits are not to be allowed.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_237">[237]</span>
You must take away what is left in the bottle.
Your master will ... now ... go ... to
sleep!” He uttered the last words in a long-drawn-out,
menacing tone. Then he went out
of the room in front of the footman, and left
the house.</p>

<p>Half an hour later, Count Told, not knowing
what he was doing, cut his throat from ear to ear.
He had a feeling as if something in his throat
were preventing him from enjoying some great
happiness, and he wanted to remove the hindrance.</p>

<p>At two o’clock a message came from Mabuse
to ask how the Count was getting on. The footman
said he was asleep, but he would go and
look at him to make sure. Then he found him
bathed in blood, where he had fallen from his
arm-chair to the ground, his body now cold in
death. The doctor’s messenger came into the
room, looked at the corpse, and went back to
report to his master.</p>

<p>The man-servant did not know what to do.
Since none of the Count’s relatives were in the
neighbourhood and he did not know the Countess’s
address, he felt he must inform the police first
of all. But then, again, he was not sure which
was the right office to go to to give such information,
and it occurred to him that the State
Attorney, Herr von Wenk, was an acquaintance
of his master’s and had asked after him recently,
so he drove to Munich, sought out the lawyer,
and told his story.</p>

<p>“Was the Count at home then all the time?”
asked Wenk.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, all the time.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_238">[238]</span>“Then why did you tell me on the telephone
that the Count had gone on a journey?”</p>

<p>“The doctor told me that on account of my
master’s state no one was to be allowed to see
him, and I must tell anybody who inquired that
he had gone away. My master saw nobody but
his doctor.”</p>

<p>“What was the doctor’s name?”</p>

<p>“I never heard his name, sir. I don’t know
it.”</p>

<p>Then Wenk remembered that Privy Councillor
Wendel had given him a letter to Dr. Mabuse,
and that the Count had used Wenk’s own telephone
to make an appointment with this doctor.</p>

<p>Wenk trembled as, struck by the horror of a
strange suspicion, he described to the footman
the figure of Dr. Mabuse as he had seen it
recently at the Four Seasons Hall. He spoke
of him as a tall man, stooping slightly, without
beard or moustache, with a broad face and big
nose and large grey eyes. When the man said,
“Yes, he looked exactly like that,” Wenk grew
pale as death. In a moment all the disconnected
impressions, hazy ideas, vague recollections, half-defined
thoughts and images which had been
partially obliterated, but not altogether lost,
gathered together in his mind. When Wenk had
the hall emptied, why had Dr. Mabuse not asked
the reason for this measure? Why had he
not inquired whether he could continue his
experiments at another time? Why had Wenk,
who had seen a man whose back he had recognized
go into the hall, not found him again inside?
Why had the two men who would not obey the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_239">[239]</span>
detective’s order to move on, suddenly done as
they were told immediately Mabuse appeared?
Why had Mabuse’s eyes, in the brief moment
he had looked into them, affected him so powerfully,
as if they sought to read something that
lay hidden in his very soul and was now almost
forgotten?</p>

<p>He dismissed Count Told’s servant, and then
tried to find Dr. Mabuse’s number in the telephone
book, but it was not given there. Yet
Mabuse had a telephone, for the Count had rung
him up from this very house. The Privy Councillor
knew the number.</p>

<p>When Wenk, having obtained the telephone
number from Herr Wendel, gave it, there was
no reply. Ringing up the exchange, he was told
that the telephone had been disconnected. He
asked who had had it three weeks before, but
this could not be ascertained at once.</p>

<p>Again Wenk rang up the Councillor. Dr.
Mabuse had changed his number; did he happen
to know his address? Wendel could give no information.
He only knew the telephone number,
and spoke to him on the phone. Wenk then
asked at the Police Registry Office for Dr.
Mabuse’s address, but the name was not to be
found anywhere among the arrivals in Munich,
and when, at the Municipal Registry, all the old
telephone books were searched to find Mabuse,
he was again unsuccessful.</p>

<p>Thereupon Wenk repaired to the manager of
the telephone exchange in order to make a more
thorough search. The manager took him to the
inquiry-room, where two young women were employed,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_240">[240]</span>
and he asked them to look again for the
number he had telephoned about.</p>

<p>“What were you wanting?” asked the elder
of the two, and Wenk explained that he was
seeking the address of a Dr. Mabuse, who
three weeks before had a telephone number that
did not appear in the directory.</p>

<p>The girl said she could not find it anywhere,
whereupon Wenk returned to the manager with
this information. He declared this was something
quite unheard of, and himself accompanied
Wenk to the inquiry office. He, too, made a
search with the clerks, but could find nothing.
While the manager was looking through the lists
without success, an idea occurred to Wenk, and
when he was informed that no one of the name
of Mabuse had been entered on the list at all
for the last year, he asked the manager for the
telephone number and address of a man named
Poldringer. As he uttered this name he saw
the elder girl start and then immediately recover
herself, but an instant later she told him rudely
that there were ever so many Poldringers in
Munich, and without the Christian name and the
exact address she could not furnish any information.</p>

<p>Then Wenk turned to the manager, saying
politely, “I am sorry to have to put you to
some inconvenience, but I must take both these
ladies into custody!”</p>

<p>He at once took up a position between the
girls and the telephone. “Be so good as to
sit down on these chairs till the detectives arrive;
you here, and your companion there!” The elder<span class="pagenum" id="Page_241">[241]</span>
of the girls turned as white as a sheet. The
other blushed, and then began to cry. Wenk
said, turning to her, “It is only a formality.
If you behave properly, this matter can be
carried through without exciting notice, and it
is probable that it will not be long before the
mystery is cleared up.” Then he rang up the
Criminal Investigation Department and asked for
three detectives.</p>

<p>The manager looked through the list of
Poldringers, for there were many entries under
the name, most of them being tradespeople. One,
of whom no further information was given, was
living in the Xenienstrasse, and another, without
any professional status, in the Ludwigstrasse.</p>

<p>The girls were given in charge, and Wenk
went to the Ludwigstrasse. He came to a
lodging-house, looked at the surroundings and inspected
the inside, and then went to the Xenienstrasse.
Then suddenly his heart stood still, for
in the Xenienstrasse, at the address given under
the name of Poldringer in the telephone list, he
saw on a professional plate the words</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Dr. Mabuse</span>,<br/>
<span class="indentleft"><i>Neurologist</i>.</span></p>

<p>He hastened away, merely noting the numbers
of the houses standing near. The street consisted
of detached villas. A mist swam before his eyes,
and the blood pounded in his pulses; there was
a sound as of pistols in his ears. He had his
man. No, he had not got him, but at last he
knew who he was!</p>

<p>Before doing anything else he drove to the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_242">[242]</span>
prison, for the time Cara Carozza had demanded
had now expired, and what she might tell him
would probably set the seal upon the success of
his enterprise.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Early that morning, when it was time for the
warder of the women’s prison to make his first
round, the door of Cara’s cell was opened. The
dancer was still asleep. She was shaken by the
shoulder and, awaking quickly, found the warder
bending over her, yet it was not the warder,
it was Spoerri. Surely she was dreaming? But
no, she was still in prison. How came Spoerri
to her bedside? She put her hand to her eyes
to shut out the vision, and yet she knew in her
heart it was reality. Spoerri was standing there.
He said to her:</p>

<p>“Surely you know that I am in league with
the warder?” She nodded. “Then you know,
too, that he told me what happened yesterday when
the State Attorney came to see you?”</p>

<p>“What did he tell you?” the girl asked breathlessly.</p>

<p>“That you are going to betray the master!”</p>

<p>The dancer sprang out of bed. “Who says
so?” she shouted.</p>

<p>“Please don’t talk so loudly. The warder says
so.”</p>

<p>“It is a lie.”</p>

<p>“The warder would have no interest in lying.”</p>

<p>“Did he tell the doctor so?” she asked
anxiously, and Spoerri lied in answer:</p>

<p>“Yes, of course he did, and the doctor sent
me to you.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_243">[243]</span>“It is a lie,” cried Cara again, on the verge
of tears; “I was going to save him!”</p>

<p>“How can you prove that?”</p>

<p>“I was going to save him, I tell you. Spoerri,
danger is threatening him.”</p>

<p>“Danger is always threatening him. That’s
mere nonsense. Can you prove what you say?”</p>

<p>Cara hastily related what had passed between
her and Wenk. Spoerri answered indifferently:</p>

<p>“I mean, can you prove it beyond all shadow
of doubt? But be quick, please, for I must get
away from here in five minutes.”</p>

<p>“What can I do to make the doctor believe
me?” asked the girl in despair.</p>

<p>“I must tell you that the doctor is very disturbed,
for he could not have believed it of you.”</p>

<p>“No, no, I could never have done it,” she
stammered, thoroughly downcast; “but how am
I to prove that I didn’t ... how can I prove
it? Surely <i>you</i> know, Spoerri, that....”</p>

<p>Then Spoerri with a smile drew out of his
pocket a small flask. “The proof lies there,”
he said.</p>

<p>“Where?” asked the distracted girl.</p>

<p>“In here, my pretty one; don’t you see?”</p>

<p>“I don’t understand you,” said the dancer.</p>

<p>“Oh, you don’t need to understand, my child,
only to drink. Just one little mouthful to swallow
and then the doctor will know your word was to
be relied on.”</p>

<p>Cara looked horrorstruck at the little flask.
“What is it?” she asked.</p>

<p>“A heavenly drink, my pretty one, nothing that
hurts one in the least. The doctor himself made<span class="pagenum" id="Page_244">[244]</span>
it up. But mind you throw the bottle out of the
window quickly! See, I am opening it for you.
Be sure you don’t forget that! And be quick
about it, do you hear? Throw it away <i>at once</i>,
for if there’s no bottle to be seen, nobody will
know what has happened. That’s what the doctor
expects of you; that is a proof that no one can
doubt. Besides, you know us. Even your
husband....”</p>

<p>With that he drew a knife out of his pocket,
playing with it lightly. He threw it at the door,
and it stuck there with the point transfixed. He
pulled it out and put it away again.</p>

<p>“Do you see that?” he said. “Now I must
be going. Well, au revoir!”</p>

<p>He was about to leave, but Cara sprang towards
him and clung to his knees, sobbing.</p>

<p>“But I am still so young, and I love life.
I have been very useful to him. I was hoping
to be set free ... by him. Set free at any
rate, even if he can never love me again.”</p>

<p>“Well, I can only tell you,” answered Spoerri,
“that he is very much disturbed about all this.
You can take it or leave it.”</p>

<p>Then the girl said, “Then I will free myself
of this existence. I will show him, a thousand
times over, that he can trust me. I will give
my life for him....”</p>

<p>“Oh, spare me your heroics!” said Spoerri
roughly.</p>

<p>But the girl went on unheeding, “What am I
after all?—a mere shadow following him about
and hiding out of his sight, but yet unable to
part from him. Yes, I will prove it, a thousand
times over.... I will free myself....”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_245">[245]</span>“Well, if we are taken by surprise now, it will
be a hanging matter for us both; he told me
so. And who knows whether they won’t even get
<i>him</i>?”</p>

<p>Then Cara became suddenly calm, and said
quietly, “It is all right; you can go. And tell
him.... No, you needn’t say anything. I don’t
want anything more from him....”</p>

<p>Spoerri left hastily, leaving the little flask in
Cara’s hand. It was now warm from her fevered
touch.</p>

<p>“He does not believe me,” she said to herself
tremblingly. “The Doctor will never believe
me again. Strange—and yet, can there be any
greater proof to offer that I was always faithful
to him? Oh life! base, incomprehensible, disturbing
life! This terrible life of mine! Come!”
she said, apostrophizing the flask; “we will show
him there is nothing to fear from me. We will
prove it to you, you ... king of men ... you
enchanting murderer! you sublime destroyer! my
horror and my bliss!...”</p>

<p>She shouted aloud, then she grew fearful lest
her cries might endanger the beloved life, and
she snatched the stopper out of the bottle. Standing
upright in the middle of the cell, she drank,
a moment later throwing the bottle out of the
window, where the sun streaming in proclaimed
the morning of a new day.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Wenk faced the curator of the women’s prison.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, we were sorry to be unable to inform
you, but it was not possible to communicate with
you. The doctor says it must have been a heart-stroke,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_246">[246]</span>
for she was found lying dead in her cell
this morning.”</p>

<p>Amazed and horrified, Wenk entered the cell.
It was empty, the straw pallet bare. Cara’s
clothing lay on a stool. Wenk looked round,
and was about to leave when he saw something
shining on the window-ledge. He went back and
examined it, and found it was a small piece of
glass, rounded in shape, with a very strong odour
clinging to it. Wenk jumped on a chair and
found another piece of glass outside. Then he
went down into the courtyard, and very soon had
collected all the other pieces of the bottle. It
had broken against one of the window-bars.
He had the glass tested, and there were evidences
of poison upon it.</p>

<p>He walked back to his chambers—pondering
over this new occurrence. “Another victim!” he
said to himself repeatedly. One more sacrifice,
a real sacrifice, for this one had sacrificed herself.
This light-of-love had offered her life as a sacrifice
to her love. She had not meant to tell him anything—he
realized that now. She merely wanted
to put him on the wrong track that she might
have a chance to warn the criminal. “I have
no success with my women helpers,” he thought
sadly, asking how it was that these steadfast souls
should be found on the side of evil rather than
good—always on the side of evil, it seemed to
him. When the dancer was buried next day, he
was the only outsider present, and he returned
to his chambers slowly and sadly.</p>

<p>There, however, plenty of work was awaiting
him. His idea was to seize Dr. Mabuse in his<span class="pagenum" id="Page_247">[247]</span>
own home, and first of all he must ascertain when
he was sure to be found at home, and the two
confederates must be secured at the same time,
the one at the Xenienstrasse and the other in the
Schachen villa; there must be no time for one
of them to inform the other.</p>

<p>His preparations must be complete, down to
the very last detail, and then a surprise attack,
which must not last more than three minutes, could
be made. It was clear that a man who could
boldly carry through such crimes as these, in the
very heart of the city and in the teeth of the
highest civil powers, would have secured himself
against all possible emergencies in his own
quarters. That was undoubtedly the case, and all
these careful preparations of Wenk’s required time.</p>

<p>First of all, he must be able to secure one of
the neighbouring villas as his post of observation.
It was here that he laid claim to Herr von Hull’s
help. He drove straight to him, asking, “Can
you do me a very great service? Will you employ
a confidential agent to lease a floor of one of the
houses No. 26 or 28 in the Xenienstrasse, or,
better still, the whole villa? I want it just as
it is, and to be able to go in the day after
to-morrow. The question of expense need not be
considered. I shall want the house for two or
three weeks. Spring is approaching, and there
may be someone who wants money for a little trip
out of town.” The old gentleman promised to
do what he could in the matter. Then Wenk
asked the police inspector who had engaged him
for the road-engine, to come to town. He arrived
by the 11 a.m. express.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_248">[248]</span>“Matters are approaching a climax, inspector,”
said Wenk. “You must be ready to take action
at any moment. I will leave the plan of it to
you. You have had plenty of time to get to
know the geography of the place and the opportunities
it affords, but the very moment you receive
my order to surround Villa Elise, you must go at
it, hell for leather. You must get your man,
alive or dead. We shall put another motor-boat
on the lake, and you can double your force on
shore. The road-engine can be moved away now.
The spring season is just beginning in Schachen,
so you and six or eight of your men can be
visitors to the lake-side!”</p>

<p>At seven o’clock next morning the inspector
returned to his post, and at eleven o’clock old Hull
came with the lease of villa 26 in the Xenienstrasse.</p>

<p>“There is a young couple living there,” he
said, “whom my suggestion exactly suited. They
wanted to go to Switzerland to visit their parents,
but were frightened at the cost of the railway fare.
I offered them five-thousand marks for a month’s
rent of the villa, and they will change them in
France. I am afraid I am causing a loss to our
exchange....”</p>

<p>“But you are benefiting your country in another
way, Herr Hull, and that you will very soon
find out!” said Wenk.</p>

<p>“You can take possession of the villa at six
o’clock to-night!”</p>

<p>At six o’clock, Wenk, disguised as a cyclist
messenger, went into the empty villa, leaving his
bicycle outside. He was quite alone in the house,
and at once sought for a window which would<span class="pagenum" id="Page_249">[249]</span>
afford him vantage ground. He concealed himself
behind a lace curtain and began to watch the
street. The first thing he noticed was that after
he had been there about a quarter of an hour
someone stole his bicycle and made off with it.
He had never seen a thief actually at work before;
this side of his calling was presented to him for
the first time to-day. He regarded it as a favourable
omen, being much amused by the comic haste
with which the thief had looked round him on
all sides, although he was even then straddling
the machine.</p>

<p>For two hours he kept watch on the front door,
side door, window and roof of Mabuse’s villa. No
one went out or in, and though Wenk remained
on the watch till midnight, nothing was to be
seen. He fell asleep at the window, woke and
watched again, and then slept once more, finally
awaking in broad daylight. His servant brought
him a meal prepared in a restaurant near. It was
a long vigil, and Wenk, bringing the telephone
to the window, held conversations with acquaintances
and with some members of the police
force.</p>

<p>At last, towards six o’clock in the evening, a
car drew up and immediately drove away again.
A gentleman went up to the front door. Was it
Mabuse? No, this was an old gentleman, with
the feeble and uncertain step of a paralytic.
Possibly he was a patient.</p>

<p>Soon after that Wenk saw a chimney-sweep
leave the house. He went along quickly and
cheerfully, puffing away at a cigarette. Wenk had
not seen the sweep go in; that must have been<span class="pagenum" id="Page_250">[250]</span>
mere chance, though. The old invalid seemed
to be there a long time; could he be waiting
for the Doctor? Perhaps, though, he was one
of his assistants. It seemed hardly likely. However,
he must do nothing rash.</p>

<p>Twilight was already advanced when a man
with a parcel rang at the front door, which was
opened with surprising promptness. Half an
hour later this man came out again, and so it
went on. Even through the night people kept
coming and going, and next day it was the same
story.</p>

<p>On the third day Wenk was called up early
by his man. The Criminal Investigation Department
had some important information for him.
Something had happened during the night at a
gaming-den. Would he like an official to bring
him a report? Yes, he replied, but the detective
should come in some sort of uniform.</p>

<p>Half an hour later the detective, got up as a
telephone repairer, appeared and told his story.
Last night a young man had come to the guard-room
and said that he and others had been
playing baccarat in a secret gaming-house. An
old gentleman, who seemed to be partially
paralysed, was playing too, and he always lost
his money. When it was just upon three o’clock
in the morning, the old gentleman had a sudden
fit of rage, shouted out something, and immediately
three men, who had also been playing, leaped
on the table. They drew out revolvers, shouting
“Hands up!” Then a fourth man went from one
visitor to another, searching their pockets and
taking all their money away, as well as that<span class="pagenum" id="Page_251">[251]</span>
lying on the table. They had taken twelve
thousand marks from the man who was telling
the story. When they came to the old gentleman
they left him alone, and he suddenly stood up
and walked out as if there was nothing the matter
with him. Two of the thieves accompanied him,
and the others protected him from behind, and
outside there were two cars waiting.</p>

<p>This story excited Wenk greatly. It did not
interfere with his scheme, but, on the contrary,
it showed that Mabuse felt himself secure. Yet
while Wenk was here in a strange house behind
a curtain like a sleepy bat, the criminal was going
his accustomed way, calmly, boldly, as if he had
nothing and nobody to fear. After all, it was
quite natural. Why should he not go free when
the man who had sworn to bring him to justice
was in hiding here behind a window curtain!</p>

<p>Taking a sudden resolve, Wenk left his post,
and did not return till evening. He had given
an order to extinguish the street-lamp in front
of Mabuse’s house by breaking the glass and
damaging the electric light bulb. It was a dark
night, and as soon as Mabuse’s windows showed
no light Wenk entered the garden. He was
carrying a canister filled with fine meal, and he
clambered over the fence into Mabuse’s grounds and
went cautiously along the garden path, scattering
the meal in a thin layer over part of the short walk
between the garden gate and the house. Then he
hurried back over the fence to his own garden
and into No. 26 again.</p>

<p>Half an hour later someone left Mabuse’s house,
but Wenk could not see who. After an hour and<span class="pagenum" id="Page_252">[252]</span>
a half, he heard steps in the street passing beneath
his window. He saw a man wearing military
dress, who went quickly to Mabuse’s door and
disappeared within the house.</p>

<p>Wenk went downstairs again and hid behind
a shrub in the garden. After a long time he
heard Mabuse’s front door open, and in the starlight
he could see that a stout, elderly lady was
leaving the house. She went into the street, where
a car seemed to spring up from nowhere. She
got into it and drove rapidly away.</p>

<p>Wenk clambered over the hedge between his
and Mabuse’s garden, crept on all fours over the
grass to the garden path, and examined the ground
by the help of his electric torch. Then he saw
that the footsteps of all three persons were exactly
the same. Therefore, whoever it was who came
out first, and the soldier, and the elderly lady,
were one and the same person. And then it
occurred to him that yesterday and the day before
yesterday the chimney-sweep, the paralytic, the
messenger with his parcel, were the same person,
and this person was—Mabuse. Wenk carefully
removed the traces of the meal.</p>

<p>To-night must lead to some conclusion or other.
In both the nearest guardrooms special police were
ready, fully armed, prepared to break in at any
moment. When Wenk knew Mabuse to be safe
at home, he would hasten to No. 26, send a
telephone call, and three minutes later Mabuse’s
house would be surrounded by police. To burst
the door would be the work of thirty seconds.
Six men would remain outside and surround the
house. The other six would join him in a rush<span class="pagenum" id="Page_253">[253]</span>
on the place. When Mabuse was secured, the
order to Schachen would go through.</p>

<p>Wenk stole rapidly back to his own garden,
stretched himself flat on the ground and waited.
The earth radiated the warmth of this day of
late spring, and he felt the power that lay in the
soil. And in an attitude of tense expectancy,
two hours, one hour, perhaps even minutes only
before his work would be crowned with success,
it seemed to Wenk as if music, a music betraying
the secrets of all hearts, stole over his senses.
Tears filled his eyes, and his bare fingers caressed
the fragrant ground. He felt as if it were the
very essence of manhood laid bare, the manhood
for which he was risking his life.</p>

<p>He had decided to lie here waiting until
Mabuse, in some disguise or other, should return
to the house. Nothing could go wrong now.
When the other was once more inside, like a
mouse caught in a trap, Wenk would hasten back
and breathe his order into the telephone.</p>

<p>But before this could happen he was to undergo
a strange experience, something which made his
heart stand still and a cry by which he had almost
betrayed himself pass his lips. A car came
up the street, and stopped with a noisy shriek in
front of the house. But no one got out. No, it
was Mabuse’s door which opened, and in the person
descending the steps, and pausing in the glow of
the headlights, Wenk recognized the Countess.</p>

<p>If he had not pressed his lips to the ground
that very instant, his cry must have betrayed him.
The car hastened back whence it had come.
“Wife-robber! Husband-murderer!” raged Wenk.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_254">[254]</span>
So this was the secret of Count Told’s death.
“The man is a devil and a werwolf!” he cried.</p>

<p>Suddenly he felt the cold night penetrating his
clothing, and he found himself trembling. Was
he going to have an attack of ague now, at the
very last minute? He struggled to subdue the
feelings that threatened to overcome him. In the
still night he heard the hammering of the pulses
in his brain, and he bent all his energies to the
task of listening for what was to happen.</p>

<p>Twelve o’clock struck, and it seemed as if the
town were shaken by the powerful strokes, as if
these beats must penetrate into the very heart
of this house which sheltered the monster, and
every vibration become a dagger hacking him to
pieces.</p>

<p>The clock had ceased striking, and a footstep
sounded, but whether near or far-off Wenk could
not at first determine, for the throbbing in his
ears. Suddenly the garden gate creaked, and in
the starlight he saw a broad expanse of white
shirt-front. A man advanced rapidly to Mabuse’s
door, and in the instant that he stood on the
doorstep, waiting for it to open, the starlight
revealed to Wenk that the figure was that of
the man he was seeking. And now the net was
closing around the victim.</p>

<p>Wenk waited three minutes, four minutes.
Would not the world come to an end during
these moments? Might not the skies fall, and
the last judgment begin?</p>

<p>Then he pulled himself together and climbed
stiffly over the fence to return to No. 26. He
rushed upstairs in the darkness, seized the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_255">[255]</span>
telephone, called for the number and gave the
guard-room the orders he had arranged. He had
but to name the street and give the number of
the house, which till now he had kept a secret.</p>

<p>A motor-cyclist was to go to the second guard-room
directly the telephone message was received.
The car containing the first relay of police was to
follow him immediately, and at the second guard-room
those aroused by the cyclist’s warning were
to be ready to get in the car and proceed with
the others at full speed to the villa. Thus it had
been arranged.</p>

<p>After Wenk had telephoned he hastened downstairs
again. He stood in the dark entrance,
waiting for the first sound of the approaching car.
Was he not consumed with fever? No, he bit
his lips firmly, made his muscles taut and commanded
himself to keep cool. He must be cold
and hard as steel. Steel it should be!</p>

<p>He had not long to wait.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_256">[256]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XVII</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> house was surrounded by the police who
had been detailed for that duty, while Wenk with
the others hastened to the front door and rang
the bell loudly, but the explosive was already
prepared. Mabuse had not yet gone to bed. The
unusual noise in the street had sent him to the
spy-hole in the shutters, whence he could see what
was happening, and the first glance revealed the
police. While he was still looking through his
peep-hole, and letting nothing of the happenings
outside escape his eye, since the searchlights
illuminated everything in the street, he was taking
down from the cupboard close by, where it hung
in readiness, a police uniform.</p>

<p>He heard the ringing at the door. He had a
telephone concealed in the wall, and this George
had connected with a villa at the back of his
garden. He pressed the connection and called,
“Spoerri!”</p>

<p>“Yes, Doctor.”</p>

<p>“The police are about to break in. Make your
escape as arranged. Fetch the Countess. Get
the new car ready for me. Burn all papers. Send
pigeon-post to Schachen. That’s all.” While
still speaking, he began hastily to put on the
police uniform over his own clothes.</p>

<p>Then there was the sound of explosion, and<span class="pagenum" id="Page_257">[257]</span>
the door was broken open, a chair flying into
the air. With one bound Mabuse was in the
corridor. When the explosion occurred he was
on the first floor, which was shut off from the
stairway.</p>

<p>Close behind the first of the police who entered
through the shattered door came Wenk, a heavy
revolver in his hand. He was at once struck by
the style of the interior, its beautiful carvings
and its costly Persian carpets. He took this in
at the very first glance as he hurried by. He
pointed in silence to the stairs, and while those
behind went up them, he and some others inspected
the three doors leading to the basement. All
were locked, and in a few minutes they had been
burst open. The police rushed through all the
rooms; one, trying to turn on the electric light,
found that it was cut off.</p>

<p>Six policemen had stormed the stairs. The
door in the panelled wall of the first floor leading
from the stairs was open. The men advanced
beyond it into a dark corridor, holding their
revolvers cocked, and touching all the objects they
encountered in the darkness. Nowhere was there
any electric light to be had, and it was some time
before they had enough electric torches to suffice
them. Then in a moment they had taken
possession of all the rooms, and the doors leading
to the corridor were shut behind them by the
detectives, who removed the keys. Wherever they
found the rooms empty, they hacked upon the
chests and cupboards. Mabuse heard the sounds,
which made his usually silent house as noisy as
a factory.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_258">[258]</span>When furnishing the house he had had a little
secret chamber made near the doorway leading to
the first floor. A carpenter belonging to his band
of accomplices had done the work. This chamber
was so cunningly concealed in the cleverly contrived
decoration of the walls as to be invisible
from the corridor outside, and on the inner side
the existence of a door would never have been
suspected. It was here that Mabuse had concealed
himself when he heard the explosion that
wrecked his front door. In this hiding-place he
had a second telephone connecting him with the
other villa. While the noise of the men storming
the stairs covered his movements, he tried to make
use of this connection, but there was no answer
from the other end; therefore Spoerri must already
have got away.</p>

<p>Now came the moment when everything must
be risked, and the chances of escape or of death
were equal. The little chamber had a second
door, and this, concealed like the other by the
decoration of the panelling, opened directly on to
the stairs. It was here that Mabuse stood to
listen.</p>

<p>He subdued all his senses with the supernatural
powers at his command, subordinating them to
his hearing; rustlings, voices, hackings, cries,
abuse, orders, the clicking of electric torches, even
the spitting sound of the acetylene searchlights,
were inscribed on his ear-drum as on a microphone.
His powers of hearing must be concentrated on
one single moment, and that was the first second,
or fraction of a second, in which there should
be neither step, nor sound, nor even breathing<span class="pagenum" id="Page_259">[259]</span>
upon the stairs. If this instant occurred before
the systematic search of the house, room by room,
had begun, it would give him a favourable opportunity,
his only opportunity, for flight. It seemed
as if the very blood in his veins stood still, the
better to help him discover the fateful moment.
All the other senses were in abeyance, and his
will concentrated on his hearing alone. He felt
as if his ear were as large as the Lake of
Constance and his hearing as fine as the vibration
of a filament in an electric light. Everything
else within him was cold as ice, and anæsthetized,
but his ear bore a volcanic life within it, and at
last he reached that single heart-beat of time
which should prove his salvation.</p>

<p>He pushed open the narrow door on to the
stairs. Until he had reconnoitred he ran a risk
that his ear might have deceived him, but he
saw at once that all was well.</p>

<p>In the corridor below a constable was standing.
As he passed him, Mabuse cried, “He has shut
himself into the bathroom....”</p>

<p>Then he saw them all running from the rooms
downstairs and pressing to the staircase. Two
men stood at the entrance, in the midst of the
fragments of the shattered door. “I am going
for reinforcements,” said Mabuse as he approached
them; “he has entrenched himself in the bathroom....”</p>

<p>They let him pass, and he ran, using one hand
to brush others aside, the other grasping his
Browning pistol. Yes, he was getting away
now....</p>

<p>The night was bright with the searchlights, and<span class="pagenum" id="Page_260">[260]</span>
their rays spoke to him of freedom and good
luck. Dazzling, enchanting visions floated before
his spirit. He drank in deep draughts of the
light outside.</p>

<p>“What’s up?” asked one of the men outside
as he rushed out.</p>

<p>“His honour’s orders ... reinforcements
wanted; he’s entrenched himself in the bathroom,”
called Mabuse in reply.</p>

<p>“Take the motor-cycle,” shouted the other.</p>

<p>What luck! Mabuse already had it between
his legs. He fell upon it, mounted, feeling as if
he had fallen from a tower on to a bed of down,
and the night, like a friendly monster, swallowed
him up, protecting him alike from the searchlights
and from the violence with which the search-party
would have seized him.</p>

<p>A quarter of an hour later he threw the motor-cycle
into the canal and rode away on his little
racing car as if sailing upon a cloud. The car
stretched its nozzle towards the south-west and
away it bounded in delight along the boulevard.
It was an armoured car....</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>“What is the matter?” Wenk asked the police
as they rushed past him.</p>

<p>“He is in the bathroom, and has entrenched
himself,” one of them called back.</p>

<p>Wenk ran up the stairs. “Where is he?” he
cried.</p>

<p>“In the bathroom,” they shouted on all sides.
“All hands to the bathroom,” ordered Wenk.</p>

<p>They ran hither and thither, and their pocket-torches
could be seen gleaming on the walls in<span class="pagenum" id="Page_261">[261]</span>
all directions. Where are they all going? To the
bathroom. Fifteen men are hastening to the bathroom.
“But where <i>is</i> the bathroom?” Wenk
inquired. Nobody knew where the bathroom was.
And now everyone was shouting out, “Halloa,
what’s up?”</p>

<p>The electric switches were overhead, and a
turn of the loosely fastened screws now gave
dazzling light to the whole place. The rooms
were brilliant in their wealth and luxuriance—pictures,
hangings, carpets, bronzes, furniture. The
bathroom was found at last, and the bath in it
was of Carrara marble, but the whole house was
empty and deserted.</p>

<p>Wenk was almost beside himself. He felt like
an empty shaft, down which everything good and
beautiful and all that was lofty and successful
had fallen into a bottomless abyss. They tapped
the walls with their hatchets, suspecting some
hidden space, and soon the secret nook was
discovered and the riddle solved.</p>

<p>Wenk pulled himself together. There was yet
another mouse-hole, and it was in Schachen, at
the Villa Elise!</p>

<p>The State Attorney made rapid arrangements
at the telephone headquarters. All the lines were
connected up with him, and everything had been
prepared beforehand. The highroads from Munich
in all directions were guarded by police. The
stretch of country between Munich and Lindau
had eight posting-stations, and at every one there
was a telephone ready at any moment throughout
the night to inform Munich of anything that had
happened there.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_262">[262]</span>Wenk raised the alarm in all directions.
Mabuse’s stratagem had given him a half-hour’s
start. If things had happened as he imagined, and
the car of the fugitive were now eighty or ninety
kilometres away, there was yet ten minutes before
Buchloe could announce its passing through. He
had hardly reckoned up the distance, however,
when he heard “Buchloe speaking!” and his heart
sang for joy.</p>

<p>“A car has just gone through at terrific speed
in the direction of Kempten. It is a large covered
car.”</p>

<p>It was 2.10 a.m., and a quarter of an hour
later came the Kaufbeuren report.</p>

<p>“A large covered car, travelling about eighty
kilometres an hour, has just passed, and taken
the Kempten road.”</p>

<p>It was now 2.25 a.m. Wenk began rapidly
to make calculations as to the speed of the car,
but just then Buchloe rang up again: “A second
car has just come through, a small, open car
with one person in it!” Ten minutes later
Kaufbeuren gave the same report.</p>

<p>“They are escaping in sections. The second
car is going faster. Mabuse must be in that one,
and his accomplices in the first,” thought Wenk.</p>

<p>From Obergünzburg he had the announcement
of both cars in the one communication, for the
second went through just as the official had
informed him about the first. Buchenberg told
him the same.</p>

<p>Then Wenk thought it time to call up Schachen.
He gave directions to await the arrival of the two
cars and then take action according to the plan<span class="pagenum" id="Page_263">[263]</span>
arranged. The man whom it was above all
important to secure would probably be in the
uniform of a Munich constable, and they were
not to be misled by this, for it would be Mabuse.</p>

<p>“Now we have him at last,” said Wenk
jubilantly, as he received one communication after
another, all of them proving that Schachen was
the destination aimed at.</p>

<p>Place after place stood out on the map to
Wenk, and through the night the villages and
tiny towns called to him and ranged themselves
on his side. He bound them together with
phantom threads, reaching to the very limits of
the Empire. He wrung the secret of the broad
highroad out of it in the darkness, and the highroad
knew nothing of its revelation. With one
small lever he held the long, unending avenue,
shrouded in darkness, in the hollow of his hand.
The forces he had disposed were obedient to him,
their general.</p>

<p>“Hergatz” rang on the telephone, and the
sound of its bell seemed to his ears as intimate
as if it were his own name being called.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he said, “it is the State Attorney,
Wenk, speaking from Munich.</p>

<p>“A little open car has just gone by very rapidly
in the Lindau direction. Two persons were in it,
but not clearly recognized.”</p>

<p>“Thank you. Hold on a minute. There will
be a second car through.”</p>

<p>Wenk waited, hearing in the suspended lines
all the sounds occurring through the night between
Munich and a little place like Hergatz, which he
had never yet visited.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_264">[264]</span>“Are you still connected?” he asked after a
while.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>

<p>“Hasn’t the second car come through?”</p>

<p>“Not yet, sir.”</p>

<p>After a time he inquired again, and once more
he was told No.</p>

<p>A quarter of an hour later he rang up Hergatz
again, and the official said that no second car
had been seen.</p>

<p>Wenk opened out the map again and made
a feverish search. Yes: Buchenberg—Isny—Gestratz—Opfenbach
... there was Hergatz!
And behind Isny there was a highroad leading
to Wangen and the Würtemberg district, or on
the left another leading to Austria.</p>

<p>He rang up Wangen, but there was no answer.
He repeated the call, and after storming for ten
minutes he tried again, but still in vain. He
had left Wangen out of his reckoning and made
no plans concerning it, and in the direction of
Austria he could give no orders, for the power of
his lever did not extend so far. A car had disappeared
from his ken; a car had been stolen
from him in the night, snatched away in the darkness
from the strange, unfriendly, gloom-surrounded
streets.</p>

<p>And then he thought again that the large car
might have had a breakdown. Yes, it must have
been so, and that was why the smaller car had
two people in it, when there was only one at the
previous stage. This new circumstance need not
worry him. His luck was not going to desert him:
he trusted to it, and it would not fail.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_265">[265]</span>He rang up Schachen. “There will probably
be only one car. Let it arrive, and then wait
twenty minutes to see whether the other one comes,
and surround the villa on all sides. Then deliver
your blow, as hard as you can!”</p>

<p>Scarcely had he finished speaking when the
telephone rang once more, and the last stage—the
Enisweiler railway-station—was heard speaking.
A small, open car had turned off the Lindau-Friedrichshafen
road, and was rapidly approaching
Schachen. Two people were in it.</p>

<p>It was all complete! Wenk himself could do
nothing more now. He would have to wait.
Perhaps in a few moments now the fight on the
lake-side which his tactics had prepared might
be going on. He ordered them not to wait for
the second car, but to enter the villa immediately
after the arrival of the occupants of the first one,
to seize and handcuff them, extinguish the lights,
and wait a full hour for the second one. He
looked at his watch, and laid it on the table
before him. It was now 3.18 a.m.</p>

<p>He felt a twitching in the muscles of hands
and feet and a throbbing in his brain. It seemed
as if a whirlwind of pain were rising from his
hips to his head, remaining there a while, and
then taking the same direction again and again,
times without number.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_266">[266]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XVIII</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Spoerri</span> had fetched the Countess from the villa
in the western suburbs, which she had occupied
but half an hour, and hurried off with her in the
car. Mabuse, in his light little two-seater, had
caught up the heavier car between Kaufbeuren
and Günzburg, and both drove on without stopping.
This had all been arranged between them long
before. Where the road to Wangen diverged from
the Lindau road, the large car ahead came to a
standstill, and the little car drove close up. The
Countess was transferred; Mabuse drove on, and
Spoerri took the road leading to Austria.</p>

<p>Mabuse had arranged that at this point their
roads should separate. Spoerri should reach
Switzerland by way of the Rhine. Each of them
must leave an address in Zürich with Dr.
Ebenhügel, who could then exchange them.
Mabuse, with the Countess, would drive to the
Villa Elise, where George, who had been instructed
by pigeon-post, would be waiting with the chest
containing the securities and the jewels Mabuse
would take with him on his flight. Then the
three of them would immediately cross the lake
to Luxburg, where a motor would be in waiting,
and proceed along the Romanshorn main road
to Zürich. There would be a brief stop at
Zürich for the transaction of business.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_267">[267]</span>It was likely that the authorities in Bavaria
would ask the Swiss ones to search for the
fugitives, and therefore Mabuse wanted to make
his stay in Switzerland as brief as possible, and
to push on to the Italian frontier. He had had
passes for himself and the Countess prepared in
a Portuguese surname. An Italian official had
been bribed, and by his help all difficulties
disappeared as chaff before the wind.</p>

<p>The Countess sat at the back of the car,
behind its high body. In front of her Mabuse,
sitting at the wheel, seemed like some monumental
image. In the uncertain light the outlines of his
powerful figure stood out with ghostly effect.
There was not the slightest movement to be seen,
and from her seat behind he looked like a block
of granite, seen standing alone in a meadow.</p>

<p>They sped by highways, villages, hamlets, and
then the waters of the lake gleamed in the night.
A few lights at intervals on its shores, shapes
appearing and disappearing in the darkness, dimly
suggesting human beings, a change in the air
one breathed ... two villages appearing to float
like illuminated ships upon the water ... there
was Switzerland already.</p>

<p>Lindau lay to the side, and their car was now
racing along roads bordered by country villas.
And then came the last minute. The car bounded
across the track to the Enisweiler station, and
rushed forward to the Villa Elise. At the first
glance Mabuse’s sharp eyes saw that the gates
opening on to the drive stood wide open.</p>

<p>The pigeon-post had arrived safely and in
good time then. He felt as if the impetuous<span class="pagenum" id="Page_268">[268]</span>
haste with which he had driven hither in the
darkness had yielded him a fresh sensation. It
was now just before 3.30 a.m., and he kept his
senses constantly on the alert without slackening
his speed. When he was about to turn into the
drive, he pressed the brakes hard for a moment
before allowing the car to run its course; it held
up for an instant, then, veering round, went straight
through the gates and turned towards the garden.</p>

<p>Just then he felt something spring on to the
car. On the clutch side, springing over the door,
a form squeezed down on the outer side of Mabuse.
Two hands covered his own, snatched the steering-gear
from him, and a wild, hoarse, impressive
voice whispered, “Doctor, I’m here: it’s George.
Give me the wheel. We are surrounded. Straight
forward into the lake....”</p>

<p>Mabuse yielded the wheel and let go the brakes.
Under its new guide the car dashed ahead,
thundered round the grey walls of the villa,
abruptly turned a corner, got on to a grass-plot,
and raced frantically across it, along the sloping
gravel patch to the wall which divided the lake
from the garden above. Through the gate in
the wall it leaped like a wild horse and then
clattered down the inclined wooden footway, the
boards thundering beneath it. A moment later
its nose was in the water and the lake hissing
around it.</p>

<p>George leant forward as quick as lightning and
gripped levers, Mabuse helping him. The night
re-echoed the Countess’s cry, and then the vehicle,
tottering slightly at first, but slowly righting itself,
went onward over the surface of the water.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_269">[269]</span>“Splendid!” cried George. “It is working
like magic!”</p>

<p>This car was an invention of his own. It could
be driven straight from the highroad into the water
without stopping, and a couple of levers turned
it at once into a motor-boat.</p>

<p>“It is the pigeons that have done the mischief,”
said George, when he had gained thorough control
of his vessel. “After they arrived in the dark,
about an hour ago, I seemed to hear whispering
voices behind a shrubbery. I looked very carefully
round, and thought I noticed a movement going
all round the park. In one place, and then twenty
paces further on, and then twenty paces beyond
that again, in a circle, the whole way round, so
then I knew we were surrounded. However, I
managed to get to the gate leading to the garden
without being seen. It took me fifty minutes to
do the hundred yards. If we had not had this
car, we should now be sitting handcuffed inside
the Villa Elise.”</p>

<p>The constables, who had distributed themselves
with all possible precautions about the villa, and
had taken four hours to complete the ring around
it, one after another taking up his position, had
heard the car thundering along through the silent
night. They lay in tense expectation at their
posts, awaiting the whistle which should summon
them to the house to fall upon the criminals.</p>

<p>Just an hour before there had been a slight
interruption. A bird had suddenly flown through
a tree and disappeared beneath the eaves. One
of the constables close to the house had noticed
it. He had seen the bird fluttering about the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_270">[270]</span>
roof and then suddenly disappearing without having
flown away elsewhere. His conjecture that it was
a carrier-pigeon was soon confirmed by the appearance
of a second bird, which also disappeared
in the eaves. The constable stole softly to the
inspector and announced what he had seen and
suspected. The latter saw at once what this might
indicate. Poldringer had received warning from
Munich, from the fugitives. He therefore ordered
a constable to proceed with the utmost caution
from one outpost to another and relate the fact,
saying that those in the house had probably been
warned, and that they must redouble their precautions
and at the same time be prepared for
stronger resistance.</p>

<p>The movements of the constable as he went
from post to post had put George on his guard....
Mabuse’s car reached the grounds, and the
inspector’s quivering fingers were already raising
the whistle to his mouth. At the moment when
the occupants of the car should have left it and
be about to close the door of the house behind
them, he meant to give the signal. Two detectives
were lying concealed in the shrubs to the left
of the front door, and could reach it before the
key was even turned in the lock, but the inspector
gave no sign.</p>

<p>The car rushed round the corner, not stopping
at the door. It tore frantically round the house
as if about to rush pell-mell into the Lake. The
inspector, forgetting all caution in the excitement
and disappointment of the moment, sprang forward
after it, and saw that it actually did disappear
in the water. Like a sinister amphibian it leaped<span class="pagenum" id="Page_271">[271]</span>
over the low wall, thundered down the wooden
footway and sprang into the Lake.</p>

<p>Then at last he blew his whistle, and the posse
of constables came running from all directions,
knocking up against each other.</p>

<p>“To the shore!” shouted the sergeant.</p>

<p>There was no car to be seen anywhere. About
two hundred yards from the shore the engines of
a motor-boat could be heard in the darkness.
They searched beneath the roadway, up and down
the lake-side, dazed and disappointed, but in vain.</p>

<p>Then at last the inspector realized what must
have happened. The unceasing efforts, strain and
hopes of an entire month had come to nought. His
prize capture had escaped him. He was so
absolutely disheartened by this maddening thought
that he unconsciously pressed to his temples the
revolver that he held ready-cocked in his hand,
as if his very life must be forfeit through the
failure of his enterprise. A moment later he
lowered the revolver, and the ball, singeing his
hair, fell harmless into the night. Upon the Lake
a light shone out. Further on, another. The
shot had aroused the attention of the spy-boats.</p>

<p>Not till then did the inspector remember these
allies, whom in his first access of despair he had
completely forgotten. “Bring Morse lamps!” he
cried. How <i>could</i> he have overlooked the motor-boats?</p>

<p>Immediately flashes were sent to the two boats:
“The fugitives have escaped, and are on a motor-boat
on the lake.”</p>

<p>“All right,” was flashed back, and a few minutes
later powerful searchlights were directed towards<span class="pagenum" id="Page_272">[272]</span>
the lake. It was not long before they had located
the escaping boat. But they had also warned
it, for at that very moment it was about to run
into them.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Mabuse and George were at once aware of
their danger. The two searchlights advancing on
them seemed like the open jaws of a monster
approaching to devour them. George steered to
larboard, and the boat settled its course in a
new direction. The water streamed over the
rudder and gleamed about them, frothing in the
darkness. “There is only one way,” said Mabuse
in a low voice, “the Rhine estuary.”</p>

<p>He considered the matter coolly and boldly.
He was once more in a situation quite familiar
to him, because he had lived through and overcome
it countless times in imagination. On the
German shore, whither they could easily return,
everyone would be on the lookout for them. On
the Austrian shore there was only Bregenz, shown
up clearly by the searchlights. Between these
two regions there was a large and very sparsely
inhabited territory around the Rhine estuary. In
twenty minutes they could reach land and then
make their choice between Switzerland and Austria.
If they were lucky enough to run their vehicle
on to land again as easily as they had run it
into the water, they would have sufficient start
to make their escape certain.</p>

<p>One of the pursuing boats, however, lay right
out in the lake. It seemed to guess at the
fugitives’ intentions, for it did not follow them in
a direct line, but remained to starboard, keeping<span class="pagenum" id="Page_273">[273]</span>
abreast of them near the Swiss shore, as if awaiting
a favourable opportunity to intercept them.</p>

<p>Perhaps it only wanted to keep between them
and Switzerland. The searchlights from both boats
met above Mabuse’s. The first faint traces of
daylight were already appearing. Firing was heard
behind them. One of the boats now followed
in their wake, but at a little distance to the rear.
The two pursuing boats exchanged Morse signals
with each other.</p>

<p>For a time George steered a zigzag course,
the vehicle swaying hither and thither with the
constantly changing displacement of the rudder.
George wanted to make it appear that he was
trying to break through to the Swiss shore, but
he, too, was excited by the searchlights. He did
not succeed in getting out of their glare for more
than a few moments at a time. The boat which
was astern only went so slowly now because it
was solely concerned with keeping them under
view and cutting off their retreat to the German
shore. The Morse signals used were secret ones,
and neither Mabuse nor George could make them
out although, through their frequent trips by water,
they were fairly well acquainted with such things.</p>

<p>Suddenly the boat to the starboard side of them
extinguished its searchlight. Above the infernal
noise made by their own motor they could hear
the engine of this boat ahead, its sound growing
shriller and nearer. Their own motor was exerting
its utmost pressure. The shooting had now
ceased, and above the sounds made by their boat
another noise could be heard. Mabuse bent
forward towards it, listening with all his ears, the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_274">[274]</span>
searchlight falling full upon him. He still wore
the police uniform which had made his escape
possible.</p>

<p>At first the Countess had lain in the boat
half-conscious. The shots, the droning of the
engines, the haste and excitement of the men beside
her, had gradually awakened her, and she began
to grasp what was happening. She, too, heard,
above the throbbing of the engines, a second
sound. She sat up, holding her head over the side
whence it came, and listened intently.</p>

<p>“What is that?” she asked Mabuse, who was
standing near, planted firmly on the deck with his
back to the engine and appearing entirely at ease.
He could be clearly seen in the searchlight with
his hand on the gunwale, listening intently.</p>

<p>“Nothing!” he hissed; “be quiet!”</p>

<p>“What is it?” she asked again in a sharper
tone, and there was something in the sound of
her voice that had not been heard for a long
time. It seemed as if a stone that had long lain
at her heart were now being dissolved into a
mass of pulp. To this feeling, still but half-conscious,
she yielded herself more and more. By
degrees she appeared to realize what was happening
within her. Then, rising and standing in
front of Mabuse, she suddenly cried out, “Now,
at last....”</p>

<p>The sounds of the water and the night stole
over her like a joy beyond bound or measure.
Eagerly she absorbed with heart and mind the
light, sweet rustle they made, and she perceived
that every moment they became more pronounced.
At last she understood. The pursuer<span class="pagenum" id="Page_275">[275]</span>
was advancing rapidly upon them, and came ever
nearer....</p>

<p>“What do you mean by that ‘at last’?” asked
Mabuse roughly. “Sit down and keep quiet!”</p>

<p>“What is that sound we hear?” she said in a
ringing voice.</p>

<p>“Death—perhaps!” answered Mabuse calmly.</p>

<p>“For <i>you</i>!” cried the woman facing him, above
the swirling of the waters. “I shall be able to
shake you off at last. I shall be saved from
you. The werwolf will be caught, and your power
over me and over others be at an end!”</p>

<p>“I will soon show you that,” said Mabuse,
advancing and bending over her; and then what
happened came so quickly that she could scarcely
distinguish the movements.</p>

<p>“George!” called Mabuse, the one word only,
and then he unfastened the police uniform which
concealed his clothing and threw it towards George,
who at once donned it and stood near the Countess,
exposing himself to the searchlight, while Mabuse
took his place at the wheel.</p>

<p>They heard a shout close to them. “Halt!”
cried a voice from out the sounds her eager ears
had been absorbing. “Halt!” A shot whizzed
in the air, and an echo resounded.</p>

<p>George fired in return. The boat gave an upward
lurch and then suddenly two high dams
enclosed it. Where was the lake? Where was
the wide expanse of night? There was a rustling
sound, and a beating against the spring tides of
the Rhine. The searchlight had disappeared, and
a soft, warm mist covered the stream and the
dams. They were smooth as railway lines,<span class="pagenum" id="Page_276">[276]</span>
and a bridge lay diagonally above them. The
throbbing of the engine resounded from its arched
vault.</p>

<p>Then a sudden movement flung the Countess
to the ground. The boat sprang up into the
air with a loud report, but the woman was caught
as she fell; she could feel herself lifted; someone
held her, and ran swiftly with her; her cries
were stifled, and a red mist swam before her eyes.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>George lay on the shore, one arm broken.
With the sound one he felt for the police helmet
and crammed it down on his head. The fall had
stunned him slightly, but he could have escaped;
nevertheless, he lay still.</p>

<p>It was not long before he saw two revolvers
levelled at him. Two electric torches glared before
his eyes. “We’ve got the one in uniform!” said
a voice. George kept quite quiet. He was carried
from the land into a boat and fettered to a
thwart. The engine started, and the boat drove
across the lake back to Schachen.</p>

<p>The day was dawning when George reached
the wooden landing-stage once more. They took
him into the villa and locked him into a room
with barred windows, out of which he could not
escape, even had two men not been in charge of
him.</p>

<p>The inspector said to himself, “Thank God, we
have caught him at last, and in his police uniform
too! thank God!”</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>At five o’clock that morning Wenk left Munich
in a hydroplane, landing two hours later at<span class="pagenum" id="Page_277">[277]</span>
Schachen. He flew up the stairs of the Villa
Elise to reach the room where the imprisoned
robber-king was waiting ... waiting for <i>him</i>,
the conqueror!</p>

<p>“Here is Dr. Mabuse,” called out the inspector,
advancing towards him. “We have him safe at
last, thank God!”</p>

<p>Wenk, jubilant, victorious, and intoxicated with
success, entered the room and saw the man in
police uniform fast bound to his chair.</p>

<p>“Where is he?” he asked.</p>

<p>“There ... on that chair!”</p>

<p>Wenk looked at the man more closely. He
knew it already: his quarry had escaped! Back
into the endless, the dark and empty night, everything
fell once more, and at first he could neither
hear nor speak a word.</p>

<p>Suddenly the inspector said, “But that is
Poldringer, the man we’ve been watching all these
weeks!”</p>

<p>“Yes, that is Poldringer,” answered Wenk
heavily. Mabuse had escaped.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_278">[278]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XIX</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Mabuse</span> hastily carried the insensible woman from
the bank of the Rhine channel to the nearest
house. It was that of an osier-binder.</p>

<p>“We have had an accident,” said Mabuse, and
then seated himself at the window to watch the
approach.</p>

<p>When an hour had gone by thus, and the
Countess opened her eyes again, Mabuse noticed
that she started on recognizing him and turned
away, overcome with dread. He went hastily towards
her and, stooping down, he whispered, “We
are saved! We are irrevocably bound together!”</p>

<p>The whispered words impressed her with a
certain sense of comfort and security. She no
longer withstood him, and soon sat up, the peasant’s
wife promising to look after her.</p>

<p>Mabuse sought for the nearest village on the
map. Then he went thither, in security, knowing
that he was not being followed. George had remained
as the victim of the pursuer’s vengeance,
and he was saved. The other’s fate was due
to the little trick of the police uniform.</p>

<p>The village was not more than twenty minutes’
distance, and in an inn he found a telephone.
He ordered coffee, and then rang up Zürich. In<span class="pagenum" id="Page_279">[279]</span>
half an hour’s time the call came through, and
asking who was there, he was answered, “Dr.
Ebenhügel, Zürich.”</p>

<p>“Has Spoerri arrived?” he inquired.</p>

<p>“Spoerri has just come: he is still here;” and
Spoerri rushed to the telephone.</p>

<p>“Spoerri, I’ve had a misfortune. George is
taken, but we have escaped. Bring the car here
at once, and put in a travelling dress and coat
for my wife. I shall expect you at 2 p.m. at the
Au railway-station in the Rhine Valley.”</p>

<p>“Very good, sir,” replied Spoerri.</p>

<p>“I called her my wife, and said it quite coolly
and intentionally,” mused Mabuse, dallying with
the thought, which yet seemed to imply something
like a fetter; but he dismissed the idea,
saying, “She <i>is</i> my wife, my own property!...
It is true, she <i>is</i> mine.”</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Spoerri arrived punctually. “I shall drive you
through the Engadine direct to the Italian frontier,”
he said, when Mabuse had told him all that had
occurred. But to that proposal Mabuse merely
uttered one word: “No!”</p>

<p>“But, Doctor,” Spoerri pleaded, “you can’t
remain in Switzerland. The Munich police have
informed the authorities here of your movements.
We shouldn’t get even as far as Toggeburg. It
would be almost better to return to Germany.”</p>

<p>“And that’s exactly what I mean to do!
Spoerri, from this day forward the State Attorney’s
life stands under my protection. You are to
revoke my earlier orders to the Removal Committee
at once.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_280">[280]</span>“You are going in for a remarkable friendship,
Doctor,” tittered Spoerri.</p>

<p>“He is to remain absolutely under my protection!”
repeated Mabuse, and they drove through
the flat marsh-land back to the peasant’s hut.</p>

<p>The Countess got into the car, and they were
soon hastening to the Austrian frontier. “What
sort of passports have you for us?” asked Mabuse.</p>

<p>“Swiss ones: please take them,” answered
Spoerri, handing over documents with many visas,
calculated to arouse a confidence which was constantly
abused yet remained unconscious of the
fact.</p>

<p>Three hours later the car was driving along
the highroad leading from Bregenz to Kempten.
It drove past a house from which, the night before,
a message had been flashed through to Munich
telling of its passing, and went towards Würtemberg.
The travellers spent the night in a village
south of Stuttgart.</p>

<p>In the evening Mabuse went to Spoerri’s room,
and said to him: “There is just one thing left
for me to do in Germany, in Europe ... and
that is to get hold of that lawyer, the State
Attorney, Wenk, alive. I want him <i>alive</i>, mark
you! as much alive as a fly under a glass. The
Countess and I are staying here to-morrow.
You will go to Stuttgart and buy, whatever the
price may be, a two-seater aeroplane. We are
quite safe here. The landlord did not even register
us, so if the police appear he is bound to hold
his tongue, or else he will be fined. Have you
any brandy?”</p>

<p>Spoerri shrank back in dismay; his martyrdom<span class="pagenum" id="Page_281">[281]</span>
was about to begin again. Nevertheless, he had
smuggled three bottles out of Switzerland.</p>

<p>“Of course you have some brandy!” said
Mabuse, before he could even answer.</p>

<p>Mabuse drank from the travelling cup which
he always carried in his pocket, and Spoerri had
to fill the toothglass on the washhandstand.</p>

<p>Mabuse was longing for a carouse, a really
heavy carouse which should seize him by the
throat and press him under the water, as if he
were being given a millstone for a swimming
belt. When he had emptied the second bottle,
he saw that he was not likely to get his wish.</p>

<p>“Haven’t you any more?” he asked.</p>

<p>“That’s all there is. I couldn’t venture to
bring any more across the frontier.”</p>

<p>Mabuse laughed satirically. “That’s fine.
Here is Spoerri, who has brought three railway
vans full of salvarsan, two of cocaine, enough
prostitutes to fill three brothels across the frontier,
yet he hasn’t enough courage to bring more than
three bottles of brandy! Empty your glass into
mine. Don’t your wages include the getting of
brandy?”</p>

<p>When the third bottle had been emptied Mabuse,
clear-headed as ever, but more hot-blooded, went
back to the room next his own, occupied by the
Countess. He was out of sorts, and resembled
an engine that had been run too fast, so that the
heat had covered the glowing cylinders with vapour,
and they could not be set in motion.</p>

<p>He approached the Countess’s bed. “You and
I had come to an understanding together. You<span class="pagenum" id="Page_282">[282]</span>
have broken through it: you were ready to betray
me!”</p>

<p>“I was!” said the Countess in a low voice.</p>

<p>Then ungovernable fury seemed to possess the
man. He snatched her from the bed, and as he
seized her, lifted her high in the air as if he were
going to dash her in pieces against the wall like
rotting timber. At that moment he hated her;
she was the embodiment of all his weaknesses.
For ten long minutes, when the patrol-boat was
on their track, the power of his will over her had
ceased, and now, when he wanted to destroy her
and would have dashed against the wall the head
that defied him, he could not do it.</p>

<p>With a low cry the woman found herself held
on high, and realized the strength of arm and
indomitable will-power of the being to whom she
was secretly—and yet irrevocably—bound. She
longed for death. Softly she repeated a fragment
or two of a prayer learnt in her childhood’s days,
and she knew that if she were to die now she
would draw this man also to his death.</p>

<p>But Mabuse, conscious of his power over the
woman he held aloft in his grasp, suddenly came
to himself again. Once more he realized that he
was alive, was safe, and felt a fierce joy in the
knowledge and in his possession of her. Almost
gently he laid her down, and the poor woman,
condemned afresh to a life of humiliation and
degradation, was at the mercy of the tyrant
who dominated her, and from whose power there
was now no escape. She lay wide-eyed and tearless
till the dawn, her only desire for floods and<span class="pagenum" id="Page_283">[283]</span>
floods of tears wherein to drown for ever the misery
of her existence.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>On the morning of the following day Mabuse
flew with her from Stuttgart to Berlin.</p>

<p>There, caught in the toils of the mighty city,
among those whose instincts he developed and
used to his own ends, he lived, bent on one aim
alone. One idea presented itself with ever-increasing
intensity, one vision swam ever before
his eyes, intoxicating him with a fury of desire.
His phantasies, his strivings, and the goal before
him gained their force because born of the strongest
impulse within him, his lust for power!</p>

<p>There was one man in the world who had set
himself to follow his path, had discovered him
in his own territory, and dislodged him from his
fortress. There was one alone who had dared to
disturb his plans, to oblige him to undertake a
flight in which his life had been in danger. It
was due to this man’s efforts that the State had
interfered with his schemes for getting rid of
those whom his imperious will desired to remove
from his path.</p>

<p>From the woman who had first moved him
to the very depths of his being he had wrested
all the power of will with which her personality
resisted him. It was his pride to know that.
He had taken her being, her beauty, her independence,
her exclusiveness, and grappled them
to himself, and this work of his was the very
highest spiritual expression of his powers and
capabilities. But between him and her there was
a period of ten minutes in which she had escaped<span class="pagenum" id="Page_284">[284]</span>
his domination, in which he had to renounce his
claim to this symbol of his superhuman force.
And that period of time, that barren, useless part
of his life, he owed to the power of this one
man.</p>

<p>His flight from Germany with this woman and
his journey across the Atlantic had been so
minutely prepared in all its details that only death
could intervene. His empire of Citopomar, with
its virgin forests, tigers, rattlesnakes, where death
lay in wait at every moment, its mountains and
its waterfalls and its rare exotic growths, was
waiting for him, waiting to set him free from
Europe, to offer him a new life. Any day might
see him crowned as emperor.</p>

<p>But he would eat of Dead Sea fruit for the
rest of his life, did he take possession of his
realm before he had seized upon this man with
all the full force of his lust for power and his
deadly hatred, had held him within his grasp and
annihilated him. Between him and Wenk it was
a struggle for existence, and he could know no
peace while the other lived.</p>

<p>Once, when the thoughts surging within him
would no longer be controlled, he replied to the
Countess’s inquiry as to when they would leave
Germany, “I shall catch him alive. I shall
catch him like a bird in the snare. He will
flutter helpless into my hands. Not till then do
I go.”</p>

<p>She turned away afraid, guessing the man
he meant. Since that moment of her resistance
and hope of escape she seemed to have become
more subdued than ever, falling deeper under his<span class="pagenum" id="Page_285">[285]</span>
demon spell. She did not venture to oppose or
question more.</p>

<p>Mabuse’s enterprise with regard to Wenk developed
slowly. But steadily and surely the net
around him was tightening....</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Wenk was in Munich again. George had been
imprisoned there, and he played the rôle of a
deaf mute. No one had heard a word from him
since his arrest. He was confronted with the
constables and tradespeople from Schachen who
had seen him for many weeks, with the young
fellows whom he had tried to hand over to the
Foreign Legion, all of whom instantly recognized
him, but he did not utter a word.</p>

<p>One morning they found he had hanged himself
with his braces. He had written one word
on the wall of his cell, the word that one of
Napoleon’s generals had made renowned after he
had lost the battle of Waterloo.</p>

<p>An exhaustive search in the Villa Elise brought
little to light. It merely revealed proofs that
Mabuse employed the money obtained by gambling
or theft to carry on smuggling and profiteering
on a gigantic scale. The police worked side by
side with the Swiss authorities, for it was believed
that Mabuse must be in Switzerland, or at any
rate that he had passed through. Wenk went
once a fortnight to Zürich. Now and then one
of Mabuse’s gang was caught, but all were so
thoroughly schooled that no word of betrayal
escaped them.</p>

<p>News reached Wenk from Frankfurt that a
gambler was at work there, whose description so<span class="pagenum" id="Page_286">[286]</span>
closely resembled Mabuse that Wenk travelled
thither at once, but when he arrived there was no
trace of the man to be found. Three days later
there was a report of a similar kind from Cologne,
then from Düsseldorf, and later both from Essen
and Hanover.</p>

<p>Wenk went hither and thither, not doubting in
his own mind that he was indeed on the track
of Mabuse. The latter must have spies in
Munich who watched and reported Wenk’s movements.
Knowing that he was followed, he took
every possible precaution, and employed all the
cunning at his command. On his journeys he
made use of trains, cars, aeroplanes indiscriminately.
Since he could not help suspecting that
Mabuse had accomplices among his own subordinates,
Wenk watched these very closely. He
changed his chauffeur and his housekeeper, altered
his address and his telephone number, took rooms
in a hotel, or lodged with friends in the suburbs.
But as soon as he arrived at the town where the
gambler had been seen, he found he had vanished
without trace of any kind, only to reappear a
few days later in some other part. The whole
country already rang with reports of the existence
and operations of the robber-king. Dr. Mabuse,
the gambler! It was like a ballad, expressing
the devilry and defiance of all who offered resistance
to existing law and order, and it spread
from place to place.</p>

<p>In all the towns the police arrested men in
gangs, but when the criminals were sorted out,
this man, whose capture was worth more to them
than all the rest, was never to be found. Suddenly<span class="pagenum" id="Page_287">[287]</span>
it struck Wenk that Mabuse must be making his
way by a circuitous route to Berlin. From his
superior officers Wenk obtained permission to leave
Bavaria, and got in touch with the Prussian courts
of justice, and these appointed him to Berlin on
special duty.</p>

<p>He at once travelled thither and took lodgings
in the Central district. Mabuse saw him arrive
at the railway-station, and an hour later he knew
where he was staying. At last he had him
within reach, in the place where he desired to
accomplish his scheme of revenge and towards
which he had been working, for Mabuse in reality
had never left Berlin. In all the towns to which
Wenk had travelled in search of the gambler,
Mabuse had doubles, persons of his own gang,
instructed by him. Munich was too small for
the scheme Mabuse had in hand. The abysses
of Berlin would be a safer hunting-ground, and
the hunt began on the very next day.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>That day Wenk had been describing to a junior
colleague in the Berlin police his course of action
in “the Mabuse case.” They had talked about
it together, discussing a plan of operation, but the
only conclusion they had come to was that the
gambler should be allowed to show his own hand
first. To aim at him in the dark would be likely
to reveal to him prematurely the whereabouts of
his pursuers.</p>

<p>In the evening, when Wenk had taken a meal
in the “Traube” restaurant, he visited a café,
and then, tired out by his long discussion, he
sought his lodgings. There a man accosted<span class="pagenum" id="Page_288">[288]</span>
him, standing in a doorway removed from the
light.</p>

<p>“If you please, sir ...” said he.</p>

<p>“What do you want?” asked Wenk reluctantly.</p>

<p>“Would some cocaine be useful to you, sir?”</p>

<p>Wenk went on without vouchsafing a reply,
and he noticed that the man followed him, but
when he came to the busy Friedrichstrasse he
lost sight of him.</p>

<p>Wenk soon took himself to task for having let
the man escape him thus. He ought to have got
into touch with this pedlar of illicit wares, for
he belonged to the same stock as Mabuse. He
was half inclined to go back, but the feeling of
weariness was too strong for him and he went
home.</p>

<p>The next night he took the same way home
from the restaurant, but the man was not there.
Wenk lingered here and there, and then, as he
approached his lodgings near the Police Market,
a man came out of an entry towards him, saying
in a whisper, “Do you want to see some nude
dances?”</p>

<p>Wenk stopped still, saying, “You have come
just at the right time. I don’t belong to Berlin,
and I should like to see the real night-life of
this city just for once. Where are your dancers?
Go ahead!”</p>

<p>“Follow me, then. I’ll go in front, and when
you see me go in somewhere, you come quick,
guv’nor, ’cos of the peelers!”</p>

<p>Wenk promised to follow his lead. The man
went round the corner, listened to see if he were<span class="pagenum" id="Page_289">[289]</span>
following, and then went on again. Suddenly
he disappeared. Wenk went a few steps straight
on. The man must have gone into one of the
entries near, and he walked slowly, expecting to
find him, and looking round about. Suddenly
he heard the man’s voice behind him, speaking
low and reproachfully: “I don’t call that quick,
guv’nor. You’ll have the bobbies after you if
you can’t be more spry. Come on here, then!”
and the man pulled him into a house standing far
back. The door opened on to a dark corridor,
and silently and unawares it closed behind him,
while the corridor was lighted up in the same
instant. This corridor led into a little living-room,
and that again into a hall crowded with
people. Two gentlemen sitting near the door made
room for Wenk beside them. His guide had
disappeared.</p>

<p>What Wenk saw was a simple performance,
deriving its interest only from the secrecy with
which it was performed.</p>

<p>He heard the conversation of the two men at
his table. One of them said, “The only thing
that interests me is how this entertainer manages
to get a hundred or more persons here, year in
and year out, without the police finding it out.
Now, as an expert, you just tell me that!”</p>

<p>The other answered in German that sounded unfamiliar,
“Well, you can’t really tell whether
it is known to the police or not. There are such
places winked at by the police because they are
traps for criminals—yes, really traps set for them.
Now in Budapest....”</p>

<p>Wenk listened eagerly. The gentlemen went<span class="pagenum" id="Page_290">[290]</span>
on talking, drawing him naturally into their conversation.
They disclosed their calling, and then
gave their names. One of the gentlemen was,
as Wenk had conjectured, a highly placed police
official. They frequently met each other. The
Hungarian told of various interesting and complicated
cases occurring during the practice of
his profession. He described the Budapest haunts
of crime, touched on the many secret gaming-houses
which had sprung up so quickly everywhere
since the war, and waxed eloquent against
the ever-increasing boldness displayed by criminals
and the mob generally.</p>

<p>Wenk, with a certain unconfessed distrust,
talked very warily, saying that he was only on
leave in Berlin, for the scene of his activities
lay in Munich. But Berlin, as the hotbed of
crime, afforded a good field of study for a
Munich criminal prosecutor. He touched lightly
on the existence of Mabuse, though without naming
him, and related some of his bold and shameless
crimes.</p>

<p>“Just lately,” said the man from Budapest,
interrupting him, “we took into custody a similar
adventurer, and we did it by curious and not
exactly legal methods, but we got no further in
any other way. With us in Hungary, as it is
with you here, the assistance of hypnotism in the
detection of crime is forbidden. We had the
man of whom we were almost certain—but, my
dear sir, you won’t betray me, I am sure, for
the professional interest you feel in putting an
end to such aberrations is just as strong in me—well,
we were practically certain that he was the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_291">[291]</span>
leader of a gang which had several murders to
their account. He was in prison, as I have told
you. He made himself out a deaf mute, and we
could glean nothing from his papers. No one
knew him, yet we felt almost sure of our man,
and that kind of thing is almost unbearable to
an expert, isn’t it?—for when he appeared before
their worships, there was the risk of his being
acquitted for lack of sufficient evidence. That
was a most disagreeable idea to me, for I had
spent about six months in tracking him down,
and if he were discharged the mistake would be
due to me. I therefore took a very bold step.
A friend of mine had hypnotic powers. He was a
barrister, and had often displayed these gifts of
his in private. I wanted him to go to the jail
with me, but he said, ‘I can operate on him from
outside,’ and, indeed, a quarter of an hour later
I knew that we had the leader of the gang at last,
and various disclosures were made which shortly
after sent him to the gallows.”</p>

<p>While the Hungarian was telling this story
Wenk experienced an aversion to him. He had
a sensation of profound mental resistance to the
man, although he could not explain what had
caused such a reversal of feeling.</p>

<p>“Are you also interested in persons who possess
this gift of suggestion?” asked the police superintendent.</p>

<p>“Uncommonly so!” answered Wenk.</p>

<p>“Perhaps you would like to meet my friend,
and see something of his gifts?”</p>

<p>“Is he in Berlin, then? Yes, that I certainly
should!”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_292">[292]</span>“Yes, he’s here now. He has given up
practising law, and now exercises his gifts openly.
He has very quickly become celebrated. You
must have heard the name of Weltmann?”</p>

<p>Wenk did not like to say No, so he answered
with a subdued “Certainly!”</p>

<p>“Well, he is the celebrated Weltmann. You
know he is noticeable on account of his having
only one hand. He lost the other in the Carpathians
in 1915. Well, we’ll arrange a meeting,
then. I will see him in the morning. Are you
on the telephone by any chance?”</p>

<p>Wenk mentioned his telephone number. Both
the gentlemen then left, to go to a house where
ether, cocaine and opium were procurable, and
other more obvious vices were pandered to.</p>

<p>On the very next day Wenk was summoned
to the telephone. “Police Superintendent Vörös
speaking! Things have fallen out most favourably
for you, my dear sir! In the home of one of
our countrymen, about whom I will tell you a few
things in confidence, Weltmann is giving an entertainment
this very evening. It is quite enough
for you to have expressed the wish; you may
consider yourself invited, without any further
formality. It is a most hospitable house, and
you won’t feel yourself in any way a stranger.
There are between sixty and seventy people invited.
I’ll undertake all the arrangements, and
if it suits you I’ll come in a car for you at nine
o’clock. The villa is some distance out behind
Nicholas Lake.”</p>

<p>“Thank you very much. Your kindness overwhelms
me,” answered Wenk, “and I do not know
how to requite it.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_293">[293]</span>“Oh, <i>that’s</i> all right,” answered the other
heartily. “We Hungarians are only too pleased
to have such a chance. Then we can regard that
as settled?”</p>

<p>“Quite, thank you!”</p>

<p>“How very amiable the Hungarians are,”
thought Wenk, as he hung up the receiver. He
felt quite ashamed of himself for having had a
doubt of the police superintendent’s good faith.</p>

<p>He spent the afternoon among the archives of
the Criminal Investigation Department, where he
and the colleague with whom he had talked concerning
the Mabuse crimes looked through the
collection of photographs of criminals. Face after
face drew his attention. He would not give up
until he had seen them all, and when he came
back to his lodgings, tired out with his protracted
labours, he had only just time to don his evening
clothes in readiness for the function he was to
attend.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_294">[294]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XX</h2>
</div>


<p><span class="smcap">Police Superintendent Vörös</span> was punctual.</p>

<p>“Now I must tell you something about our
host and my fellow-countrymen out there by the
Lake,” he said directly the car started. “He
was formerly Prince of Komor and Komorek, and
he married a Viennese dancer. Of course, his
people were furious! They made things so disagreeable
for him that one day he said, ‘All
right: you’ve gone too far. You’ve done with
your Prince. From to-day I am plain Komorek,’
and then he wandered off. He was very rich,
anyhow, and not in any way dependent on his
people. The only thing that is still ‘princely’
about him is his mansion out yonder. You will
see it for yourself. He’s been living there for
ten years now. His wife is very smart and exclusive—more
exclusive than a princess. Of
course, she is no longer young. Have you had
your evening meal?”</p>

<p>“No, I had no time.”</p>

<p>“Well, that does not matter. At Komorek’s
house they are always ready for guests. You’ll
get something good to eat there.”</p>

<p>Wenk asked himself, “Why is the man so
talkative?” and once more his feeling of repulsion
for the Hungarian regained its sway. He
was inwardly both excited and uneasy, and in spite<span class="pagenum" id="Page_295">[295]</span>
of the darkness in the car his eyes smarted.
There seemed to be a constant stabbing sensation
in them, and the thousands of likenesses he had
seen that day seemed to be chasing each other
round and round in a never-ending stream. “How
much I should like to be at home and in bed!”
he thought to himself. The car drove through
districts which were unknown to him, and this
was peculiar, for he had made the trip to
the Nicholas Lake several times already and
thought he knew the district beyond Friedenau.
To-day, however, everything seemed unfamiliar.
Was it the thick darkness of the night and the
very sparse illuminations allowed since the war,
or was it his own mood, which was responsible?</p>

<p>“Surely we ought to be at Nicholas Lake by
now!” said he.</p>

<p>“I am not familiar with this neighbourhood,”
said Vörös.</p>

<p>“I used to have friends out there, and I often
drove there by motor-car, but of course that was
before the war.”</p>

<p>“Ah, yes, before the war. Everything was
different then,” and they both became silent.</p>

<p>Wenk looked at his watch, but it was too
dark to read the dial, and for a long time now
there had been scarcely any lights.</p>

<p>After a prolonged pause, Wenk said, “Surely
the driver has not lost his way?”</p>

<p>“He is a Berlin taxi-driver. He told me he
knew the way quite well.”</p>

<p>Wenk took up the speaking-tube: “Chauffeur,
you know where it is? Nicholas Lake, the
Komorek Villa.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_296">[296]</span>At this moment the car swung round, and lights
appeared at the end of a long avenue.</p>

<p>“Here we are!” said the superintendent of
police.</p>

<p>The motor soon drew up among other cars,
all close together in front of the outside staircase
leading to the house. It was not lighted, but the
three French windows in the hall on to which
it opened gave sufficient light. Wenk advanced
rapidly to the light. Vörös conducted him to the
cloakroom, which was filled with overcoats. A
clock in the hall struck ten; its strokes were
harsh and hasty, as if it would flog the hours
away. Wenk, trying to count them, could not
keep up with it.</p>

<p>“Ten o’clock,” he said to himself. “We’ve
been an hour coming, and yet the car seemed
to be doing about forty-five kilometres an hour.
Nicholas Lake is not so far away as all that!”
and again a faint misgiving stole over him.</p>

<p>He looked towards the Hungarian, who was
smiling pleasantly at him. Then they went towards
the large folding doors.</p>

<p>“Allow me to precede you, so that I may introduce
you to the Princess at once.”</p>

<p>A man-servant threw open the door and Wenk
followed the police superintendent into a fairly
large hall. The first thing he noticed was that
the light was very subdued; then he saw that in
one corner there was a semicircular raised platform,
draped with Persian hangings. Some chairs
and a table, covered with a dark cloth, stood
upon it. In the rows of chairs which filled the
room, folks in evening dress were sitting. There<span class="pagenum" id="Page_297">[297]</span>
were many fewer ladies than gentlemen, and those
there were, were dressed in very fashionable and
striking attire.</p>

<p>Then Vörös murmured, “The Princess!” and
presented Wenk.</p>

<p>“Is this the friend you spoke of?” said the
lady, with a winning smile. “You are very
welcome, Herr von Wenk. We are pleased that
you are able to give us your company this
evening. May I pass you gentlemen on to my
husband? A hostess’s duties, you know, my
dear sir!...”</p>

<p>The lady stepped a little nearer to one of the
electric lights, which were all covered with silk
shades of a strong deep colour. Then Wenk saw
that his hostess, whom he had taken for quite
young, was very much made up and thickly
powdered. Her dress was extremely glaring, and
Wenk was startled by her general appearance as,
with an extremely friendly smile, she inclined her
head towards the man advancing, saying, “My
husband,” and left them.</p>

<p>“Good evening, Prince,” said the police superintendent
to a man who bowed to Wenk in what
the latter considered a slightly affected way; and
as his host raised his head again, Wenk looked
into a swarthy face with a black moustache,
strongly resembling one of those seen in the collection
of criminals’ likenesses he had been studying
earlier in the day. The lady of the house was
not in sight.</p>

<p>The Prince, who in appearance was somewhat
common, possessed the most finished manners. He
had, moreover, the very rare gift of conversing<span class="pagenum" id="Page_298">[298]</span>
without saying anything, for all the subjects of
conversation seemed, as it were, extraneous to him.
He accepted any subject offered him, apparently
only to give form to the matter in hand, but
made no contribution of his own.</p>

<p>“That manner of his shows breeding,” thought
Wenk. “He is only moderately gifted, but he
has such a desire for form that even the most
trivial matter must be expressed ‘just so’! But
what a curious appearance he has!”</p>

<p>The Prince led him to the first row of chairs,
and the company were begged to take their seats.
Wenk did not see Weltmann among them, for
he would, of course, have been noticeable at once,
through having lost his hand.</p>

<p>Wenk sat on his hostess’s left, with the Hungarian
police superintendent close at hand. The rich
hangings on the little stage swayed lightly, and
a tall, broad-shouldered man, with rather bowed
shoulders, came forward. He was well and
fashionably dressed, but in contrast to the other
guests, who were all in evening clothes, he wore a
dark grey woollen street-suit. It was at once
evident that the hand covered with a dark grey
glove was an artificial one. “He is a Hungarian,
that’s quite certain,” thought Wenk, “in spite of
his German name.”</p>

<p>Weltmann had a thick black moustache with
drooping ends. His eyebrows rose suddenly,
making a high arch over his eyes. His black
hair was combed right back and plastered smooth.
The few words he spoke were simple and somewhat
rough.</p>

<p>He said that the gifts he was about to display<span class="pagenum" id="Page_299">[299]</span>
before the Prince and Princess and their guests
were matters of fact, and he thought that the
guests would prefer facts rather than an attempt
to explain in words what would probably never
be explainable. He would first offer himself as
subject, and ask someone to name a lady and a
gentleman in the company. Perhaps the Princess
would name one.</p>

<p>Then the Princess said, “As the gentleman
you want, I should like to name my neighbour,
Herr von Wenk!”</p>

<p>“And the lady? Perhaps the Prince would
name the lady?”</p>

<p>The Prince answered at once, “Then I shall
name my wife.”</p>

<p>Weltmann seated himself, laying his artificial
hand upon his knee in a way which everyone
noticed. The other hand he kept in his coat-pocket.
After a pause, in which he had collected
his thoughts, he said, “Princess, have I ever had
your watch in my hand—the little watch you carry
in your hand-bag?”</p>

<p>“I don’t believe you ever have!” answered
the Princess.</p>

<p>“The number of that watch is 56403. It is
an oval-shaped <i>dernier-cri</i> design!”</p>

<p>The Princess drew out her watch, opened it,
read the number, and nodded. She showed it to
both her neighbours, and said eagerly, “That’s
quite right!”</p>

<p>“Please to think of a colour and write it down
upon a piece of paper, and show it to your
neighbours.”</p>

<p>The Princess considered a while. Then she<span class="pagenum" id="Page_300">[300]</span>
wrote down, “The amethyst colour of Herr von
Wenk’s ring,” and handed the piece of paper to
Wenk.</p>

<p>Weltmann thought for some time, then he said
hesitatingly: “It is a colour in your immediate
neighbourhood, but it is rather indefinite. It is
transparent, so it is probably that of a jewel. I
cannot say exactly what two colours it is made up
of, but there is violet in it.”</p>

<p>“Lift your ring up to the light, Herr von
Wenk,” said the Princess, and all could see that
a deep violet was mingled with a transparent
bluish-white.</p>

<p>“Which gentleman did the Princess name?”
asked Weltmann.</p>

<p>“My neighbour, Herr von Wenk,” she replied.</p>

<p>“You, sir,” went on Weltmann rapidly, as
Wenk nodded slightly, “have your pocket-book
in your right-hand breast-pocket. In it there are
two notes for one thousand marks each; one is
dated 1918, Series D, No. 65045, and the other
Series E, No. 5567. Shall I go on, or will you
see first whether this is correct?”</p>

<p>Wenk felt his pocket laughingly.</p>

<p>“No,” said Weltmann, “I meant the right-hand
pocket, not the left. In the left you have
your Browning pistol, stamped with the Serraing
trade-mark, No. 201564.”</p>

<p>Wenk looked in amazement at Weltmann, for
it was quite true. His Browning <i>was</i> in his left-hand
pocket, and it was one of the Serraing make.
From all sides folks gazed at him, and the Princess
leant towards him, so that he could distinguish
the scent of the powder she used.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_301">[301]</span>“Well, what do you think of that, Herr von
Wenk?”</p>

<p>The entertainer smiled down at him, saying,
“You need not mind showing the revolver, for in
another compartment of your pocket-book you
have the permit which allows you to carry firearms.
It was renewed in Munich on January 1,
1921, and its number is 5. You must have been
in a hurry to get your weapon authorized.”</p>

<p>“Was he dreaming, and was this singular man
sneering at him?” thought Wenk. He brought
it out, and everything was just as stated.</p>

<p>“Enough of that sort of thing,” said Weltmann.
“Now, if you will allow me, we will have some
examples of transference of will. I should like
one of the gentlemen to come up here.”</p>

<p>Someone stepped on to the stage.</p>

<p>“Do you know this gentleman, Princess?”</p>

<p>“Yes, it is Baron Prewitz!”</p>

<p>“Is the Baron’s being known to the Princess
sufficient for the company to rule out the idea
of any private understanding between him and
myself?”</p>

<p>There were cries of “Certainly!”</p>

<p>Meanwhile Weltmann was writing on a table
something which it was impossible for the Baron
to read. Then he threw the small writing-block
down to the company below. He looked at
Prewitz, quite quietly, for a short time. Then
Prewitz, with stealthy movements, left the platform
and went slowly and cautiously from chair to
chair, looking everyone in the face. Weltmann
called out, “I should like four ladies or gentlemen
to come up here quickly. Be quick, please!”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_302">[302]</span>Several started up. Three gentlemen and one
lady remained on the platform, the others returning
to their seats. Weltmann placed them round the
table, pointing at a pack of cards lying there.</p>

<p>“Are this lady and these gentlemen known to
the company?”</p>

<p>The Princess nodded, and there was a chorus
of “Yes!” Meanwhile Prewitz was advancing
towards Wenk. Again Weltmann wrote for some
time upon a memorandum, casting from time to
time his glance upon the four sitting at the table.
Suddenly one of them said, “Shall it be vingt-et-un
or poker?” Weltmann went on writing.</p>

<p>They decided upon vingt-et-un, and at once
began to play.</p>

<p>“We want one more,” said the lady.</p>

<p>“I am just coming, dear lady,” said Weltmann.
“You take the bank!”</p>

<p>By this time Prewitz had come to Wenk. He
looked at him steadfastly for a while, then suddenly
seized his left breast-pocket and drew out
the revolver, placing himself at Wenk’s side, the
weapon in his hand.</p>

<p>Weltmann said from the stage, “That is because
you are so incautious as to carry a loaded
revolver in your pocket! Please”—he turned to
the audience—“be so good as to read what I have
written there!”</p>

<p>Someone read out: “The Baron is to go along
the first row, chair by chair, and where he finds
someone with a loaded revolver in his pocket, he
is to take it out and sit beside him with it.”</p>

<p>They all clapped their hands, a proceeding
which Weltmann, by a brief gesture, stopped. He<span class="pagenum" id="Page_303">[303]</span>
left off writing, handed the block down to the
Princess, and sat down with the card-players.</p>

<p>“Page one!” he said to his hostess. She
read it to herself, then handed it to her right-hand
neighbour and looked anxiously towards the
stage, where the following incidents were taking
place. Weltmann won game after game. Sometimes
he looked away from the table, and then it
seemed to Wenk as if he were beckoning him
to come up. Wenk knew it must be a delusion,
due to some effect of the light striking Weltmann’s
eye, but none the less he felt uneasy. The idea
occurred to him to yield, and go up so that he
might face this man at close quarters and make
sure that those lightning glances had no reference
to him. “Yet that would be very foolish!” he
said to himself, striving to get rid of the impulse.</p>

<p>Suddenly, without a single word having been
spoken, one of the players leaned back, saying in
a clear ringing voice, as if speaking aloud in a
dream, “What have I just done? I had twenty-one,
and then someone spoke with my voice, and
said, ‘I have lost again.’”</p>

<p>He seized the cards he had thrown aside, and
showed an ace, a knave and a ten.</p>

<p>“Too late!” said Weltmann, who was holding
the bank. Wenk put his hands to his head. He
had already lived through such a scene once
before. When was it, where, and to whom did
it occur? He cudgelled his brains to remember.
The image of it stood out distinctly, but it stood
apart from any suggestion of the time and place
and person.</p>

<p>From the recesses of his mind a form seemed<span class="pagenum" id="Page_304">[304]</span>
to emerge simultaneously with his groping efforts
to recover the recollections he sought. A form—was
it a human being, a lifeless column, a monster?
He could not say which ... but then the form
was bleeding somewhere, and now Wenk saw,
through the misty phantasies of these recent occurrences,
that it had a mouth, and that this mouth
suddenly uttered, in clear staccato tones, the name
“Tsi—nan—fu!”</p>

<p>Wenk now distinctly recollected having heard
this name from the lips of the old Professor who
was none other than the Dr. Mabuse on whose
account he had come to Berlin. “Dr. Mab ...,
Dr. Mab ...,” whispered the secret voices. Wenk
tried to call to mind the features of the old Professor,
but he could not recollect them clearly.
Only the mouth which had uttered the name of
the Chinese town with such strange impressiveness
was distinct to his vision.</p>

<p>“Now why,” said Wenk to himself in the
midst of the images raised in him by these recollections,
“why should I think at this moment of
the pseudo-Professor? Why do I think of the
Professor, and not of Mabuse under another form,
his real form, such as I saw him that evening
in reality in the Four Seasons Hall? Mabuse
as a hypnotist? What audacity! As a hypnotist
appearing in public? Had Mabuse the same disconcerting
capability as Weltmann, and had
Weltmann the same dark background of crime as
Mabuse?” he asked himself. His thoughts grew
ever more remote, more indistinct and unreal.
They were no longer thoughts—they were misty
images which had arisen in his phantasy under<span class="pagenum" id="Page_305">[305]</span>
the compelling power of those eyes yonder. He
sought to fix his eyes on Weltmann, striving to
picture him with a reddish beard, such as Mabuse
had appeared possessed of when he first encountered
him.</p>

<p>And then suddenly Wenk realized how it was
he felt some unmistakable connection with the
player there who threw away his cards although
he held twenty-one and must undoubtedly have
won the game. These words were familiar to him
from the story told by the murdered Hull. They
were written upon the first page of the notebook
stolen from him by Mabuse’s chauffeur when he
left him that night in the Schleissheim Park, and
he had copied them down word for word after his
first talk with Hull. Yes, the bleeding form
was that of Hull, and it drooped like a weeping-willow
over Wenk’s spirit. The blood-besprinkled
leaves whispered ever “It is I, Hull! It is I,
Hull!”</p>

<p>Then it seemed as if in the mists which continued
to gather in ever-varying shapes in Wenk’s brain
there grew and stood out, as the bone stands
out from its tissues in the Röntgen-ray photographs,
a dark nucleus, a central, death-endowed essence,
something stony ... something black ... a
man.</p>

<p>The Princess handed him Weltmann’s block,
and he thrust these ideas away somewhat, though
he had to struggle to see the words. Then he
read: “The banker wins every game. If one
of the players has a better card than he who
holds the bank, he is incapable of holding them
against him.”</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_306">[306]</span>He had hardly read this when Weltmann,
speaking from the midst of his game in a voice
which seemed to strike Wenk to earth, said,
“Read the second page!” Wenk turned the page
in affright. He read, “Under the hypnotist’s influence
one of the players tries to cheat, by
dealing himself an ace. He is caught in the
act!”</p>

<p>Then the blood rushed to Wenk’s heart, and
like molten lava it coursed along his veins. His
eyes were fixed and glassy, and his trembling
fingers let fall the block. A horrible certainty
burst upon him. That was the secret of Count
Told’s fall! Mabuse had subconsciously forced
him to cheat, to ruin him in the eyes of the wife
whom Mabuse desired to possess! That was why
he had seen the Countess leaving Mabuse’s house
that night. Mabuse it was who had killed her
husband.</p>

<p>What Mabuse had written down occurred on the
stage. The lady, who had in the meantime taken
over the bank, dealt the cards so as to cheat and
was caught in the act. Thereupon Weltmann
brought the experiment to an end. He released
the four subjects from their hypnotic state, and,
disturbed and still dreamy-eyed, they sought their
seats once more.</p>

<p>Weltmann looked down at Wenk, and the latter
knew without a doubt that he was Mabuse. The
suddenness of the discovery paralysed him for
the moment, and he struggled to regain calm and
self-control. Had he been enticed into a snare?
Was the Hungarian police superintendent appointed
as a decoy? Was this whole place, so far removed<span class="pagenum" id="Page_307">[307]</span>
from other dwellings, and this assembly
merely an ambush arranged on <i>his</i> account?</p>

<p>Slowly he fought the matter out. He stood
between two poles. Either all around were in
league with Mabuse, and in that case there was
no hope of escape, and what he was now going
through was merely the preparation of a revenge
which could only end with his death, or else it
was merely by chance that he found himself in a
company in which Mabuse also appeared accidentally.
It might well be that Mabuse was a
Hungarian. He might also have been a barrister
in Budapest formerly, for his relations with the
Privy Councillor Wendel proved that he had had
a twofold career. It was not, therefore, to be
assumed straight away that he and this criminal
could not have met by accident. The next question
Wenk asked himself was whether Mabuse recognized
him, and he told himself that it must be
so, for Mabuse had seen him both at Schramm’s
and at the Four Seasons Hall; that was certain.
But could this man be so foolhardy and so certain
of himself that in spite of that he could represent
before Wenk’s eyes, with a devilish mockery, what
he had just seen occurring on the tiny stage?
If so, it provided the solution to all the enigmatic
acts with which he had concealed his
crimes.</p>

<p>The help of the police was quite out of the
question, for Wenk did not even know where he
was. But how would it be to let the Prince into the
secret, and get help in the company itself to secure
the murderer? He could only do it if he were quite
sure of the company, otherwise it was doomed to<span class="pagenum" id="Page_308">[308]</span>
failure from the start. He knew from experience
that this master criminal was always surrounded
by a bodyguard of accomplices, and that they were
people who shrank from no devilish deed. Around
him there must be many of Mabuse’s confederates.
Should Wenk, as if accidentally, make his way
to some door and escape under cover of the darkness,
leaving Mabuse to be dealt with at a later
time, when he was better prepared to accomplish
his overthrow ... or should he try unobserved
to find a telephone in the house and summon
the police? But then again, where were they to
come to?</p>

<p>“Isn’t it remarkable, Herr von Wenk? Have
you ever seen anything like it before?” said Vörös.</p>

<p>Wenk had heard the question, but he was so
preoccupied with his own train of thought as to
forget to answer it enthusiastically, as he had
intended to do. In the torrent of ideas and
possibilities which rushed through his mind he
forgot his resolution. Vörös gave him a hasty
glance, and just at that moment Weltmann asked
for fresh assistants.</p>

<p>Wenk, coming to a sudden resolve, pulled himself
together and calmly and boldly ascended the stage,
the very first to respond. Far better to look the
wild beast in the face than be behind him! Then
he noticed that Baron Prewitz, whom everybody
had forgotten, followed him up. Stepping forward
as before, automatically, he came after him, still
holding the revolver.</p>

<p>“You don’t venture into my domain without
protection, I see, Herr von Wenk,” smiled the
hypnotist.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_309">[309]</span>“That is just sarcasm,” said Wenk to himself;
“he knows who I am!”</p>

<p>Wenk merely bowed, as much as to say that
in Rome he did as Rome does. He was now
standing next the hypnotist, and each took the
other’s measure. Wenk had pursued this werwolf
with vindictive fury because in him he saw the
enemy of all that could heal and restore the nation.
When he stood there on the platform with him,
isolated for a moment from all the rest, he felt
as if they were two great powers going in opposite
directions. To his mind it was no longer the
conflict of good and evil; it was the struggle
of man to man; and, oppressed as he felt, he still
had something almost like confidence in the
chivalry of his opponent ... a confidence that
rested upon an impelling yet hardly perceptible
instinct: both were staking their lives on the
result of the struggle. Each was directing a
fierce attack upon the other, yet both must make
allowances in this last supreme moment.</p>

<p>“If only I could sleep!” thought Wenk with
an inward yearning.</p>

<p>He looked closely into Weltmann’s eyes, taking
in all his features. His was a powerful, muscular
figure, and in imagination Wenk divested the face
of its false moustache, eyebrows and wig, seeing
beneath it the smooth-shaven, well-formed cranium
of Dr. Mabuse. Wenk would have recognized
him now beneath all his disguises. He gazed
at him calmly, and the other’s glance flickered.
The large grey eyes seemed to withdraw into
their own fiery depths.</p>

<p>For a time the performer paid no attention<span class="pagenum" id="Page_310">[310]</span>
to Wenk. He concentrated on those who were
advancing. No sooner had one of them set foot
upon the stage than he unexpectedly turned right
round again and hurried back into the hall. One
after another did this; a dozen, and even more.
Those below were laughing heartily, and the little
hall re-echoed with their merriment. More and
more pressed forward, but the effect was the same
on all. With one hand Wenk grasped the wrist of
the other, anxious to see whether he retained consciousness
of nerves and muscles. He meant to
resist. The welling-up of generous and magnanimous
feelings had rapidly cooled. He hated,
menaced and execrated his enemy now, and prepared
himself for the final conflict. His eager
blood was inflamed against his foe, and he watched
him warily, while still upon his defence. Somewhere
in his being a stringed instrument like a
guitar seemed to be playing a melody, and he
began to listen to this mysterious music. It was
so tender and yet so distant, but then he fell
back again upon his position of guard and defence.
Suddenly a strange idea occurred to him. How
would it be if he too did like the rest, and ran
as if impelled down there along the gangway
past the chairs—that gangway of safety and
escape—to where the big door stood encouragingly
open ... to escape and at the same time to do
his duty ... to go to the nearest telephone and
summon the police ... to carry out a daring
trick ... and then do like the others, return,
still in the same dreamlike state ... return to
the hall and wait—wait for the police, the rescuers?...
It would be a daring trick!</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_311">[311]</span>Already some of the muscles in his legs were
twitching.... Then Weltmann called out harshly
to Prewitz, “Why don’t you pay attention? Cock
your revolver! Don’t you see that this criminal
is trying to escape?” He pointed at Wenk, and
Prewitz cocked the revolver with a dreamy nonchalance,
an indifference that excited horror and
dread. He raised the revolver to Wenk’s face,
and Wenk saw in its little orifice the dark hell
of danger before him, for he knew that the weapon
was loaded. “The first step that he takes, without
my orders, you will shoot,” said Weltmann
with an ambiguous smile.</p>

<p>In this dread moment Wenk heard once again
the clear sweet musical tones, now in another
direction. They sounded soft, sad, and familiar,
as if it might have been his father whistling a
lullaby beside his cradle. He listened, and in the
few heart-beats in which he was lapped in the
sound of those wonderful tones, he lost the sense
of reality he had had when he felt with one hand
for the pulse of the other. The flute became the
magic flute, and round this phantasy there rose up
an enchanted garden. A high, thick hedge circumscribed
the area of his uneasy wanderings,
but there was a gap in the hedge, a wide, unguarded
gap, and in it he perceived the free light
of heaven beckoning and enticing him to tear
away and escape.</p>

<p>And then he ran, defying the Baron’s revolver.
He sprang with leaps and bounds across the
stage ... the weapon dropping from the Baron’s
hands.... He sprang down its steps at one
bound, rushed along the gangway, leaping like a<span class="pagenum" id="Page_312">[312]</span>
young colt that feels the approach of summer.
The entire hall was animated over this crowning
stroke of the hypnotist, but Mabuse sent after
him a ferocious laugh that resounded from the
walls which had witnessed it.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<span class="pagenum" id="Page_313">[313]</span>

<h2 class="nobreak">XXI</h2>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Wenk</span> ran full tilt past the servants at the door,
who stood with serious faces, laughing behind
their hands. He ran through the hall and the
open door on to the steps, clattered down them,
and flung open the door of the waiting car. It
sprang forward, and in a few moments had disappeared
in the dark avenue. In the hall Mabuse
stopped laughing to say, “He is going to the
Hell Café to fetch you some of the devil’s white
bread!”</p>

<p>The jerk with which the car started threw Wenk
back on to the seat, but scarcely had he touched
it than the cushions seemed to open and he sank
quickly into a hole in them. Something closed
together over him, and it creaked like iron. Then
he awoke from his hypnotic state. He lay there
in misery, unconscious how he had got into that
position, with his head hanging back, apparently
in some gap in the back seat. He tried to rise,
seeking painfully for ease and consciousness, but
he could not raise himself from the depths. Something
seemed to press him down again, and hard
unyielding fetters were crossed over him many
times. The motor went at furious speed, and
shook him against an iron grating which he soon
discovered to be the fetters that made an upright<span class="pagenum" id="Page_314">[314]</span>
position impossible. They pressed closely
down upon him. He made a furious effort to
throw them off, but soon found it was quite impossible.
He would only have his trouble for
his pains. He was absolutely done for. He was
himself the bird which had stepped on to the limed
twig!</p>

<p>With angry defiance he turned upon himself
saying, “That is as it should be! The stronger
one conquers, and you were the weaker!” But
why was he the weaker? Because he had undertaken
a task that from the very first exceeded
his powers. Each one knows his own capabilities.
But what had tempted him to undertake something
beyond him? Why, in the most forlorn and
miserable situation of his whole life—a situation
that seemed so incredible that he still had a faint
hope it might prove only a dream—why was
he able to guide and reason out his thoughts
like the solution of an arithmetical problem?
What was it that had enticed him? He knew
the answer. It was the good in him, the outcome
of his feeling of responsibility towards his fellow-countrymen.
He wanted to help them, and because
his conscience was stronger than his powers,
he had come to grief. If this experience were
to end in his death, at least he would die in a
good cause, and the soul-sparks which at his
death would flame up again in some other
existence would form a beacon to light others
upward.... He would live again in spirit among
men....</p>

<p>The sound of the motor echoed through the
forest, and Wenk heard it. What was the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_315">[315]</span>
enemy’s plan regarding him? The car raced on
through the night like a ship driven by the
typhoon. Where was it going? Whither were
they taking him? Was it to Munich? But, if so,
why? If they wanted to put him to death for
having disturbed the powers of evil and undermined
their efforts, why did they not take their
revenge at once, instead of delaying it for
hours?</p>

<p>He noticed that the windows of the car had no
blinds, and he saw stars gleaming fitfully through
the panes. They would not arrive in Munich till
the morning, and it would be impossible to drive
a fettered man by daylight over half Germany
in a car with the inside exposed. They were
carrying him off somewhere or other, but where?
Where could it be?</p>

<p>It must have been midnight when he left the
villa, but even that he did not know for certain,
for of all that had happened to him since the
moment when he had tested his pulse, he had
only a dim and hazy idea. They must certainly
be taking him to the place of execution now.</p>

<p>He recalled, with an endless yearning which
seemed to encompass him like the sea, his long-dead
father, and with all his energy he clung to
these recollections, melancholy as their associations
were. The jolting hither and thither of his
body in the car and the mental excitement under
which he was labouring made him sick, and in
his helpless state he could not even turn his head
aside. His brain lost the power of thinking in
clear outlines. Spectres arose around him and
devils played ball with him. They tossed him<span class="pagenum" id="Page_316">[316]</span>
backwards and forwards between the Carse of
Gowrie and Aconcagua, let him fall, and snatched
at him again, just as he was about to be dashed
to pieces on the Cape of Good Hope.</p>

<p>Then it seemed as if a gigantic black band
had stuffed him down in a cave as if he were
a sack. The walls of this cave were so close
that he could not lie down, but suddenly,
slowly, and yet without ceasing, they began to
grow. They did not grow apart, however, but
proceeded, always at the same pace, towards him,
and the moment was already close at hand when
they would crush his bones together and burst
his brains. Consciousness forsook him, and he
fell into a dreamlike condition, dominated by a
dull sense of impending death.</p>

<p>When he awoke he found himself stretched out
on a leather seat, the iron fetters no longer binding
him. But his arms were tied behind him, and
his legs were crossed on each other and fastened
together. A large handkerchief had been bound
over his face, so tightly as to be painful. It
covered his mouth altogether and made breathing
difficult.</p>

<p>It was now day, and he heard a rushing sound
that rose and fell at intervals. He soon recognized
it—it was the sea! A man looked down
upon him. The handkerchief covered one eye only,
and with the other he saw, over the edge of the
bandage, half the objects on his eye-level. He
did not know the man, who just then called to
another, “Come here! he is awake.” Then the
other came to look at him, and he too was a
complete stranger to Wenk. He heard them<span class="pagenum" id="Page_317">[317]</span>
talking, and one said to the other, “It is nearly
five o’clock. The Doctor must be here soon!”</p>

<p>The other answered, “If he said soon after
five, he will come then. We must be ready for
him!”</p>

<p>“Can’t you see anything yet?”</p>

<p>The two men went off. Wenk tried to raise
his head, but could not see beyond the frame of
the window. The country must be flat—there was
nothing but sky discernible.</p>

<p>“Give me the glass! There he is!” Wenk
heard suddenly.</p>

<p>“Now comes the decisive moment,” he thought,
and summoned all his powers to help him dispel
the dread ideas which crowded upon him.</p>

<p>The events that followed occurred in rapid
succession. The door of the car was flung open,
and hands gripped him by the shoulders, which
lay nearest the door. They dragged him out, his
feet striking painfully on the step and then on
the ground. The second man took his legs, and
they carried him a short distance. Then Wenk
saw sand-dunes in front of him, and a few steps
further the men had climbed with him to the top.</p>

<p>“Faster!” cried the man behind, as he turned
round and looked back over the landscape.</p>

<p>Wenk heard a motor-car, and said to himself,
“That is Mabuse coming!” Suddenly a light
awning appeared above him, and after a time he
recognized it for the wing of an aeroplane.</p>

<p>The two men arranged everything with hasty
movements. Wenk was laid on the sand, and
two cords tied together made a noose under his
chest and arms. One man raised his legs and<span class="pagenum" id="Page_318">[318]</span>
these were fastened by two cords which had been
attached somewhere to a pole rather high up.
A third leash was then slung round his hips.
It was not long before Wenk realized that he
was hanging bound to the outer wall of the
car of a flying-machine. He lay closely fastened
there like a package that was to be taken on a
journey. With his uncovered right eye he saw
beyond the edge of the bandage that the aeroplane
stood on a prepared landing-stage over a course
which sloped down to the sea. Beyond it stretched
the shore. It was ebb-tide.</p>

<p>“I am going to have a sea voyage,” cried a
despairing voice within Wenk sadly. “How long
it is since my last voyage. All the years of
war lie between, and yet now, for me, comes the
war—the bombshell is prepared.”</p>

<p>From the depths of his muscular being there
came an answer to this sad voice of despair.
He exerted his muscles against his bonds. His
body moved and wriggled in the nooses, and the
wing of the machine quivered beneath the shock,
and swayed above him.</p>

<p>Then a broad face and a high, well-formed head
bent over him, and two fiery eyes seemed to pierce
him through and through.</p>

<p>“Aha!” said the voice of the man who stood
above him.</p>

<p>“Yes, there is the foe, there is Mabuse,” thought
Wenk.</p>

<p>“Get in!” he heard him say, and there was
the rustling of a woman’s dress, and out of the
rustling a voice ... a voice that made his knees
tremble in their bonds. He knew that voice!<span class="pagenum" id="Page_319">[319]</span>
The rustling was louder and closer, and the
woman’s voice cried, “What is that?” Wenk
heard the horror, trouble and anxiety that spoke
in the voice as she put the question.</p>

<p>“Get in!” said Mabuse again. Then the voice,
the well-known, low, sweet voice of the Countess
Told, said in a tone of anxious entreaty, “What
are you doing with this man?”</p>

<p>Wenk said to himself, “She does not know
who I am.”</p>

<p>“Get in! He’s going to make the trip with
us, and we haven’t a third seat. Come along
quickly, now!” cried Mabuse.</p>

<p>Wenk saw Mabuse’s arm seize the woman and
lift her into the gondola, then he himself got
in, making use of Wenk’s body as a step, and
when he was settled in the pilot’s seat, not two
fingers’ breadth above Wenk, he bent down to him
and said in a harsh tone, “The gentleman is
going to accompany us on our journey—but
whither? Good luck!—All ready?” he called out
to the men.</p>

<p>“All quite ready, sir!”</p>

<p>The propeller hummed and the aeroplane glided
along the course so swiftly that the very moment
Wenk felt the throbbing of the engine its wheels
were already clear of the ground and the earth
vanished from his sight. The machine soared upwards
steeply, and it seemed to Wenk as if his
body were standing upright. No word was spoken
in the car. The air beat so heavily upon
him that it seemed like flying wood, and he soon
began to feel bitterly cold. The cold seemed
to cut through the wide opening of his evening<span class="pagenum" id="Page_320">[320]</span>
suit and strike at his very heart. He felt that
it pressed ever deeper and deeper within him, like
revolving knives. His hair was stiff and stood
on end, and it seemed as if needles were pricking
him all over. He had lost all capability of
thought, save for one idea. It dimly occurred to
him that he was enduring martyrdom, and that this
martyrdom was on account of the Countess Told,
whom he had once loved, at a time when such
love was not lawful.</p>

<p>Then he felt the blow of a fist on his head,
and a harsh voice asked, “Is twelve thousand feet
high enough for you?” A few moments later he
heard, “Or are you already dead—of fright?”</p>

<p>The voice died away and Wenk felt that the
aeroplane was being righted. When it was flying
level, a hand touched his head, hastily tearing
away his bonds. Then Wenk saw the face of
Mabuse bending over him. He was silent, but his
features were distorted with a malicious joy which
aroused horror. His grey eyes had neither shape
nor pupils; they were like old weather-beaten
stones, and, as Wenk recognized with a shudder,
they were glowering death at him. Then the
capacious mouth opened like the yawning chasm
in a rocky gorge, and the harsh voice said, “You
have dared to oppose your will against mine. You
are now facing your last moment, and I have
taken the gag from your mouth so that my ears
may enjoy the shriek with which you fall twelve
thousand feet down to your own world!”</p>

<p>Wenk heard his voice, and it sounded like
thunder rolling along after the lightning flash.
He saw that Mabuse was loosening the bonds<span class="pagenum" id="Page_321">[321]</span>
that held his legs. He tugged and tore at them.
Suddenly his legs were free. For a moment they
fell, then the leash that was bound round his
hips held them again, and the hands were now
busy with this. In a few seconds it was untied.</p>

<p>In his further fall Wenk’s body regained an
upright position, held only by the noose which
bound his chest to the wall of the car. He
suddenly felt that his hands were free, and at
this feeling he was fired with a sudden hope. In
the midst of his phantasies there surged upwards
like a fairy story the recollection of the Countess’s
beauty and sympathy. He had never forgotten
her, and now in the last moment of his life, when
she herself was so close to him, his feeling for her,
exalted to an undying and compassionate brotherhood,
was wafted as a cloud beyond the savage
and brutal murderer, to envelop the frail human
being beside him with indomitable pride and
courage.</p>

<p>Wenk saw her eyes, fluttering like birds shot
down in the clear blue ether, glance for a moment
beyond and above Mabuse’s eager bent head....
He saw her hands, tearing off their fur gloves,
cling white and trembling to Mabuse’s shoulder
as she strove to drag him back from his deadly
intent.</p>

<p>But Mabuse shook the woman off, and raised
his hands with mad rage to untie the last noose.
He tore undone the first of its fastenings, making
Wenk’s body sink deeper, and beat away Wenk’s
hands, which were seeking to maintain a grip
on the edge of the car, with his closed fists.</p>

<p>Then one last defiance of fate, arising from the<span class="pagenum" id="Page_322">[322]</span>
will to live, lent strength to Wenk’s voice as he
shouted in the air, “He is the murderer of Count
Told. He made him cheat at cards! He put
the razor into his hands that he might cut his
throat!”</p>

<p>A fist struck at his mouth, and blood spurted
from it, yet at this last moment of his life it
seemed as if his very blood were tasting the sweetness
of a noble spirit. Then a final effort was
made to release him from the bond that held
him. A fearful weight pressed on his head, rolled
over his body to press him downward. The
weight of it was immeasurable, black, imbued with
the swiftness of a raging storm. But all at once
the iron weight was removed. A part of it became
detached from the aeroplane, unrecognizable, and
sank. Wenk’s hands held the edge of the car as
in a vice. The aeroplane hovered and swayed
as if drunken with the high clear air.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>This is what had happened:</p>

<p>When Count Told’s name rang through the air,
as if thrown from measureless space, it seemed to
the Countess as if she were awaking from a dream
at the bottom of a swamp. Since the night when
she had been torn from her husband and chained
to Mabuse’s wicked will, she had never spoken his
name, nor even thought of it. The memory had
crept into her inmost being and hidden itself
away, deep in the welter in which her life was inextricably
bound. It had been forced there by
the diabolic power of Mabuse’s lust for domination,
and the wife had suffered it in a kind of
subconscious self-defence. Were it not so, she<span class="pagenum" id="Page_323">[323]</span>
would have been absolutely and entirely without
escape from the werwolf.</p>

<p>There within her the name had lain and waited
and watched until now it arose again to provide
her with a way of escape.</p>

<p>Wenk’s last words had brought it forth from
the subconscious recesses once more. The Countess
had received it as a direct weapon against the
secret power of this man who had so long taken
forcible possession of her will and her entire
person. She suddenly came to herself, and all
that was frozen within her melted. The gloom and
darkness in which she lay bound grew lighter,
and it was day within.</p>

<p>Then, too, she regained all the proud youthful
force of her disposition. She fell into a God-given
fury, and her muscles were endowed with
unconquerable strength and vigour. Her hands
and her heart were like iron, and she seized the
first weapon to hand, the heavy screw-wrench,
striking the murderer from behind, and dealing
a terrific blow upon his skull.</p>

<p>Mabuse, judged and condemned, lost his balance,
and fell over Wenk into the depths below, which
instantly swallowed him up.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Wenk reached a thwart with his legs, raised
himself up at lightning speed, the knots at his
breast breaking of themselves. He fell into the
car. The aeroplane was already swaying in space,
but Wenk seized the throttle and righted it. It
flew on, and after he had found his whereabouts
he shut off the engines and allowed it to descend
to earth and glide along the shore.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_324">[324]</span>He landed on the sand-dunes of the East Frisian
coast. He helped the Countess out of the machine.
She was pale, but fully conscious. She fell down
before him, pressing her hands to her face.</p>

<p>He raised her, saying, “We have saved each
other’s lives. Let us keep silent, and strive to
forget. We part here!”</p>

<p>But the Countess answered, “No. I have
nothing to conceal and nothing to forget. The
blood that I have shed was entirely evil. I have
saved him from himself and mankind from him.
Who can bear witness against me?”</p>

<p>Wenk looked at her, dumb with astonishment,
but slowly he understood. Then he was seized
with awe. He wanted to say, “How proud,
how courageous she is!” but his heart glowed
within him. He spread out his arms in a gesture
of self-abandonment and appeal. Life, his regained
youth and vigour, came over him like a flood, and
at the same moment the love which had been
shaken by so many vicissitudes, but had never yet
found its fulfilment, regained its sway over him.</p>

<p>Then they ascended the dunes together, to seek
the nearest village and return to daily life.</p>
