<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>

<p>Scarcely heeding the abuse and scorn heaped
upon him by the crowd, out of the chaos and
confusion of the contemptuous glances of others
and his own feeling of perplexity, Count Told stole,
as if in a dream, towards the vestibule. He
thought of his wife, but he had not the courage
to look round for or inquire about her. His car
stood before the door, and the chauffeur was about
to start the engine when the Count made a gesture
of denial, saying, “Wait for the Countess!”</p>

<p>He went into the town and hired the first taxi
he saw to drive him home. “What has happened
to me?” was the question that he perpetually put
to himself. “What was it that overcame me?
Who moved my hand?... What is it that has
happened? I know nothing about it. Can it be
merely a bad dream?”</p>

<p>But it was no dream. He reached his house and
had to descend. He went down the length of the
garden and into the house. The footman took his
coat, and the Count went to the room where he and
his wife, whenever they had been out together,
were wont to spend a short time before going
to bed, in exchanging the experiences the evening
had afforded. He always looked forward eagerly
to these moments.</p>

<p> To-night he was alone there. “Where can my
wife be?” he asked himself, astonished and yet
unconscious. So many tender memories clung to
this room, and he felt disappointed that in this
dreadful hour she was not by his side. It was the
first painful experience of his existence.</p>

<p>But all at once it became clear to him that she
must have sundered herself from him, and he
realized that by that inexpressibly strange occurrence
at the gaming-table in the Wendel mansion
he had covered himself with mire. It clung fast
to him, and he thought, “Lucy must leave me.
She must remain away until I have purified
myself.” But how was he to accomplish the task?</p>

<p>And suddenly there came over him, like an icy
blast in all its pitiless severity, the full meaning
of what he had done. He had done it, he really
had put cards at the bottom of the pack and then
drawn them when he wanted them, and with these
he had won money. Yet he had not desired to
win money! What could have happened? Was
there no help anywhere? He had done something
against his will. His act had thrust him out of
decent society, and to the end of his days he would
be known as a cheat. Was there no help to be
found?</p>

<p>“I know now,” he said to himself, “what it is
I have done, but I do not know how I came to
do it, neither the why nor the wherefore. I am
growing crazy, losing my self-confidence, and I
shall henceforth be unable to feel safe, whatever
I do. Horrible, monstrous thought! I am absolutely
afraid of myself. How can I ever have
reached such a point? Yonder is a sculpture by
Archipenko and the picture hanging there is one
of Kokoschka’s; I am quite certain of that; but
what proceeds from my own brain, and is my own
creation, of that I can never more feel certain
again. I retain my sight, hearing and feelings, but
my brain is rotting!... I shall end in a lunatic
asylum! My body moves in the light of day
while my mental powers are wrapped in a dim
twilight. Is there no one that can help me?”</p>

<p>He struggled with his tears, but he could not
even allow himself to weep, for he thought, “Perhaps
I shall lose all consciousness of what I am
doing. If I weep, may I not possibly destroy a
picture that I have hitherto loved and worshipped,
or abuse my man, or act improperly to Lucy’s
maid?”</p>

<p>And suddenly, at the utterance of his wife’s
name, he collapsed entirely. “Ah, Lucy, light of
my life, can <i>you</i> not help me?” he cried. “Will
you not come? Have you no longer faith in me?
Why am I left alone?”</p>

<p>He rang, and then, hastening to meet the footman,
inquired for the Countess.</p>

<p>“The Countess has not yet returned,” he was
told.</p>

<p>“Nor telephoned? Has she not...”</p>

<p>“No, my lord, but an hour ago Herr Dr. von
Wenk rang up, asking if he might have the honour
of waiting on her ladyship to-morrow morning.
His telephone number has been written down.”</p>

<p>“Go!” said the Count. “I will go to Dr.
Wenk ... yes, to Dr. Wenk,” he thought, and
then, a prey to a thousand nameless fears, he cried
aloud, “Or else I shall hang myself! I must
be able to tell some human being what I
feel....”</p>

<p>He hurried to the telephone, giving the number
written down. “Yes, this is the State Attorney,
Dr. Wenk!” answered a strange voice in the
distance, and Told began to tremble. But he
rallied all his energy and self-control, saying, “Can
I speak to you at once?”</p>

<p>He was terribly afraid that the fever of his
desire might melt the connecting wire and that
he might get no answer. He breathed freely again
when he heard the words, “With pleasure! I shall
expect you!”</p>

<p>“Fritz!” he shouted; “get the two-seater
ready,” and he drove back to Munich.</p>

<p>Wenk believed he had come on the Countess’s
errand, and that something had happened in the
prison to put an end to the enterprise they had
in hand.</p>

<p>“I think, Count Told, that after all it was too
risky an experiment. The Countess....”</p>

<p>“No, no,” cried Told, interrupting him. “I ...
I ... it is on my own account that I’ve
come here,” and then he began his story. He
told, too, what an extraordinary sensation of heat
he had felt at the back of his head, and this must
have been the forerunner of misfortune. “Do not
be vexed, Dr. Wenk, that I, a stranger, should
come to you thus, but I should have had to
put an end to myself if I had not been able to
confide in someone to-night. May I go on? Well,
these powerful rays, that were like red-hot iron
at the back of my head, changed gradually to a
feeling of well-being throughout my whole body.
They seemed to bathe me in pleasant warmth,
and I had a feeling that I was somehow saved
from something that lay before me, and in this
very moment of relief ... it happened! In the
first half-hour afterwards I denied that it could
have done, but when I reached home I realized
that the dreadful story was true, and this thing
had really happened. There is no getting away
from it, either for others or for myself.”</p>

<p>Wenk at once recalled his experience with the
old Professor. He was startled. Could it be
possible that here too ... and he thought of
the Countess and of Cara Carozza. He asked
Told, “Have you any suspicion at all?”</p>

<p>The Count did not understand the question.</p>

<p>“Any suspicion? What do you mean? That I
have been like this before? Ill in this way? No,
never!”</p>

<p>“No, a suspicion of any special person who
was there?”</p>

<p>“The idea never occurred to me. I can’t understand
how anybody else could.... No ... I
don’t suspect anyone!”</p>

<p>“Was there nobody in the company who did not
seem to belong there, who was not quite like the
other guests?”</p>

<p>“It was a company of the Privy Councillor’s
intimate friends. No, there was nobody!”</p>

<p>Wenk rejected the idea. Besides, how could
there be any connection between the criminal he
was seeking and the Count’s act of cheating? It
was apparently a momentary mental aberration,
a loss of will-power. A subconscious process in
a strange and elusive personality which bordered
upon morbidity, which thus strove to register a
mental impression upon its fellow-players. The
Count ought to consult a psychiatrist. It was
extraordinary that he should appeal to him, a
criminal prosecutor, but he did not put any question
to him on this head.</p>

<p>Told became silent, and the lawyer respected
his mood. Then suddenly he seemed to pull
himself together and said, “I realize that I am
keeping you from your night’s rest; I beg you
not to be vexed with me. In misfortune it seems
as if the mind sinks into a gulf, and the consciousness
grasps at the nearest support. You had rung
up, and there was some connection between you
and ... my house, and so....” He broke
off. “But tell me, am I really saying what I want
to, or am I talking nonsense? You see, that is the
horror of such an experience as mine. It seems
as if I shall always require a neurologist to guide
my future life.”</p>

<p>“Reassure yourself, Count; you are speaking
quite clearly and saying exactly what you want to
express. I beg you to make use of me if you
can. My calling in some respects borders upon
the sphere of the specialist in nerve-disorders;
perhaps it goes even further, and at any rate it is
bound up with the most mysterious and most
speculative part of man’s being. I am very sorry
that the occasion that brings you to me is such
an unfortunate one, else I should be only too
pleased by your visit.”</p>

<p>While Wenk was speaking, desiring to convey
that anything out of the common which was
mentally or spiritually of an unusual and critical
nature was really his concern, the idea occurred to
him to enlist the Count’s sympathy in his own aims.
Count Told was a man of the world. He belonged
to a sphere through which Wenk hoped to be able
to endow the life of the nation with nobler
qualities and loftier ideals. In the practical
necessities which the last few months had forced
upon him he had almost neglected the ideal side of
the task before him. The events of this night
had brought him into unexpected relations with a
human being, and he could best serve him by not
leaving him alone. He explained his views to the
Count.</p>

<p>“They talk of ours as the ‘upper’ class. This
description, which certainly has a substratum of
truth, must be made a living reality once more.
Our class, free of the struggle to obtain a
better social status, is more than ever called upon
to foster intellectual development and mental gifts.
It must cherish these noble qualities in itself and
turn them to account for others. Our sphere of
politics must be the spiritual one!”</p>

<p>Count Told’s life hitherto had been irreproachable.
Both in sentiment and in the externals of
life he had shown himself superior, but for lack of
serious pursuits to which he could devote himself
he had thrown his energies into following up his
hobbies, such as the collection of Futurist works
of art, for which there was as yet no standard to
judge by. He patronized young poets who were
at present but a minority and a novelty. They
were brought into the light, and the discovery of
their powers engaged the serious attention of himself
and his like. The struggle to get possession
of something new and striking was carried on in
this respect just as it was by the profiteers of
ordinary wares.... It was not the uneducated
rich who devoted themselves to it, but those who
sought for their wealth a channel which should
return their gold stamped with the impress of
beauty and of intellectual superiority. But these
fell victims to the age, and their ideas dissolved
in hysteria akin to that of a weeping woman whose
whole consciousness can hold but one idea. The
value of money declined, and in so doing its power
over men became all the greater; it seized upon
them with ever-growing force, till at last it was
like a disease.</p>

<p>Such was the connection between the hobbies
of the Count and his like and the age they lived
in. The age made use of what was valuable in
them. The propagandists of the “new art” were
merely stockjobbers, uniting their intellectual ambitions
with their speculations. The celebrated
“Blue Horses” were to be had for a couple of
hundred marks at first. X. bought them for eight
hundred, and now it was impossible to obtain them
for two hundred thousand. It was such anecdotes
as these that spurred them on.</p>

<p>For a long time Wenk and Count Told discussed
these things. The Count opposed Wenk’s view,
having learnt some of the terminology of the artists
whose pictures he bought.</p>

<p>“Folks even begin to say,” said Wenk to him
on one occasion, “that he speaks as well as a
Futurist! And this school begins to affiliate itself
with another intellectual movement of our day,
which stands on much the same foundations—with
the so-called theosophy. You will notice that the
Futurist <i>eo ipso</i> is also a theosophist or an anthropologist.
But it is not because these ideas are
really inwardly connected, but because the pursuance
of them is united. You will always find
nowadays that those who most freely deplore
the materialism of our age are those who in private
life are most devoted to it. Moreover, in the one
case as in the other, it is not always a question of
money. Mental and spiritual greed is also an
aspect of this age, which exchanges the dominion
of one for that of another. Everywhere folks are
seeking, seeking eagerly to escape from the misery
of the present, and for us mortals there remains
but warfare—war against those near us, against
those among us, and against ourselves, and it is
our class especially which must wage war against
ourselves!”</p>

<p>Wenk then asked the Count whether he would not
spend the night with him, as it was now so late.</p>

<p>The Count answered involuntarily, “Yes, but
my wife....” Then he stopped, looking at
Wenk, and his face showed the return of his tormenting
thoughts. After a time he began again:
“You had caused me to forget my trouble,
Dr. Wenk! For this night I have robbed you of,
which you have devoted to me so sympathetically,
I shall eternally be in your debt. I cannot think
how I should have lived through it—alone! Now
it seems to be behind me, and I gratefully accept
your offer of a bed.”</p>

<p>“How would you like,” said Wenk to Count
Told next morning, “for me to see the Privy
Councillor and relate your story to him?”</p>

<p> “I should be extremely glad if you would.”</p>

<p>He hesitated as if he wanted to say something
more. Wenk noticed it and waited. Then he
said, anticipating the other, “I am absolutely at
your service. If you have any other wish....”</p>

<p>The Count answered quickly, reddening as he
spoke, “Yes, I want to speak to my wife. When
I think of her I feel ... so ashamed!”</p>

<p>“You need not be ashamed!”</p>

<p>“My wife has such a strong and forceful idea of
life. It always seemed as if she found our life
together a somewhat feeble thing.... I wonder
whether it will be possible for her to go on
living with a husband who henceforth is but an
invalid.”</p>

<p>“I will see her, too,” said Wenk.</p>

<hr/>

<p>The Privy Councillor received Wenk at once.
As amiably as he could, and in the pleasantly
sarcastic tone which distinguished him on all occasions,
he told Wenk that his opinion was that
the Count had been anxious to adventure something
that might raise him in his wife’s esteem. The
force of her personality stood far above his own,
and he hoped to attain to it by undertaking so
hazardous a scheme as to “pack” the cards and
win the game. It was not on account of the money,
he was convinced of that. He merely wanted to
exercise his imagination in adventure as his wife
did, but her strength of character always ensured
a safe way of escape. For the more feeble personality
the first attempt had ended in misfortune.
His phantasies had been excited by the current
stories of the thieving band of gambling cheats,
and the whole affair was mainly due to his neighbour
at the table, whose own desire for gain
influenced a weaker character and thus paved the
way to a society scandal.</p>

<p>“May I inquire, sir, who this neighbour was?”</p>

<p>“Ah, now that I have been so unamiable as to
speak of him thus, I cannot possibly betray him.
Moreover, he is the blameless head of a household,
a professor of physiology.”</p>

<p>“The matter is a great deal more serious than
you can have any idea of, sir. The Count spent
last night with me, driven to get away from himself.
He told me the story, down to the most
trifling detail, and I have no reason whatever to
suspect that he was misrepresenting the facts. He
was absolutely confounded and crushed by the
affair. It seemed as if it had been a failure of
intellectual force, a sudden inhibition of brain-control.
May there not have been someone among
your guests who exercised some special influence
on the Count?”</p>

<p>“No, there was no Futurist poet or painter
among them,” laughed the Privy Councillor.</p>

<p>“I beg you not to consider my questions importunate,
Councillor. You really are convinced that
no such person was present?”</p>

<p>“I do not believe there could have been any.
All my guests have been personally known to me
for some time. You know what the occasion of
our meeting was, don’t you? We were studying
the effect of hypnosis on a medium. There were
experts, professors, artists of repute, and some
personal friends in the company. Then there was
a Dr. Mabuse, whom I have not known very long,
but whose extraordinary success as a practitioner
I respect very highly. He practises psychotherapy.
And that reminds me. If Count Told’s state
is such as you describe it to be, we might see
what he can do for the Count, who is the son of
one of my very oldest friends, for I feel a great
deal of sympathy for him in his present position.
Tell him from me that I strongly advise his seeing
Dr. Mabuse, to whom I will give him a letter, for
I know his telephone number only.”</p>

<p>Wenk said farewell, and drove from the house
to Count Told’s villa at Tutzing, hoping that he
might find the Countess there, but he was told
by the footman that neither his master nor his
mistress had spent the night at home. Then he
returned to his own chambers, where the Count,
pale and haggard, waited eagerly for him.</p>

<p>“I felt sure of it,” he said disconsolately, when
Wenk told him that the Countess had not returned
home, “but one always hopes for the impossible.
And what about the Privy Councillor?”</p>

<p>“I told him exactly what you told me; he had
regarded the matter in another light, but not a
very serious one. He advises you to consult a
neurologist whom he knows, and has given me
this letter to him for you.”</p>

<p>“Dr. Mabuse,” read the Count. “Why, he
was at the party last night.”</p>

<p>“Shall I go to him?” suggested Wenk.</p>

<p>“No, Doctor, I really must not rely on your
kindness any longer. I must pull myself together
and deal with this crisis in my life. I will call
up Dr. Mabuse on the telephone, as we have his
number there. I will do it from here, if I may.”</p>

<p> “Dr. Mabuse,” said the Count at the telephone,
“you were present at Privy Councillor Wendel’s
party last night when I had the misfortune
to....”</p>

<p>“That is so.”</p>

<p>“I want your professional help. The Councillor
gave me a letter of introduction to you. Can I
bring it at once?”</p>

<p>The other voice answered harshly, “No. I do
not see patients except in their own homes.
What is your address? Expect me there to-morrow
morning at 11 a.m. Repeat the appointment;
what time is fixed?”</p>

<p>“Eleven a.m.,” said the Count, thoroughly terrified,
and then he left Wenk’s house.</p>


		</section>
	</body>
</html>
