<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h2>

<p>At nine o’clock next morning Mabuse was at
Count Told’s villa. As he was now endeavouring
to hold himself ready for flight at any moment,
he wanted to bring this matter of the Count to
an end.</p>

<p>He had desired him to drink, and for some
days now Told had been drinking, in passionate
abandonment. Mabuse looked at him in silence.
When Told was intoxicated he said to him, “You
are a person without the slightest power of resistance.
Where is your razor?”</p>

<p>In a thick voice Told answered that it was
on the washstand.</p>

<p>“Is it sharp?” said Mabuse with a peculiar
intonation. “Sharp enough?” he repeated with
an emphasis so marked that it seemed as if he
wanted to hammer an idea into the Count’s head.</p>

<p>Mabuse took it up, seized a sheet of paper
and made a sharp clean cut in it. Then he said
threateningly, “Yes, it is sharp enough.” Thereupon
he laid the razor aside, but did not return
it to its case. He called the servant in, saying
to him, “The Count’s condition is not so good
as it was. He is drinking brandy with his Tokay.
I have no objection to a little light Burgundy,
but these strong spirits are not to be allowed.
You must take away what is left in the bottle.
Your master will ... now ... go ... to
sleep!” He uttered the last words in a long-drawn-out,
menacing tone. Then he went out
of the room in front of the footman, and left
the house.</p>

<p>Half an hour later, Count Told, not knowing
what he was doing, cut his throat from ear to ear.
He had a feeling as if something in his throat
were preventing him from enjoying some great
happiness, and he wanted to remove the hindrance.</p>

<p>At two o’clock a message came from Mabuse
to ask how the Count was getting on. The footman
said he was asleep, but he would go and
look at him to make sure. Then he found him
bathed in blood, where he had fallen from his
arm-chair to the ground, his body now cold in
death. The doctor’s messenger came into the
room, looked at the corpse, and went back to
report to his master.</p>

<p>The man-servant did not know what to do.
Since none of the Count’s relatives were in the
neighbourhood and he did not know the Countess’s
address, he felt he must inform the police first
of all. But then, again, he was not sure which
was the right office to go to to give such information,
and it occurred to him that the State
Attorney, Herr von Wenk, was an acquaintance
of his master’s and had asked after him recently,
so he drove to Munich, sought out the lawyer,
and told his story.</p>

<p>“Was the Count at home then all the time?”
asked Wenk.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, all the time.”</p>

<p> “Then why did you tell me on the telephone
that the Count had gone on a journey?”</p>

<p>“The doctor told me that on account of my
master’s state no one was to be allowed to see
him, and I must tell anybody who inquired that
he had gone away. My master saw nobody but
his doctor.”</p>

<p>“What was the doctor’s name?”</p>

<p>“I never heard his name, sir. I don’t know
it.”</p>

<p>Then Wenk remembered that Privy Councillor
Wendel had given him a letter to Dr. Mabuse,
and that the Count had used Wenk’s own telephone
to make an appointment with this doctor.</p>

<p>Wenk trembled as, struck by the horror of a
strange suspicion, he described to the footman
the figure of Dr. Mabuse as he had seen it
recently at the Four Seasons Hall. He spoke
of him as a tall man, stooping slightly, without
beard or moustache, with a broad face and big
nose and large grey eyes. When the man said,
“Yes, he looked exactly like that,” Wenk grew
pale as death. In a moment all the disconnected
impressions, hazy ideas, vague recollections, half-defined
thoughts and images which had been
partially obliterated, but not altogether lost,
gathered together in his mind. When Wenk had
the hall emptied, why had Dr. Mabuse not asked
the reason for this measure? Why had he
not inquired whether he could continue his
experiments at another time? Why had Wenk,
who had seen a man whose back he had recognized
go into the hall, not found him again inside?
Why had the two men who would not obey the
detective’s order to move on, suddenly done as
they were told immediately Mabuse appeared?
Why had Mabuse’s eyes, in the brief moment
he had looked into them, affected him so powerfully,
as if they sought to read something that
lay hidden in his very soul and was now almost
forgotten?</p>

<p>He dismissed Count Told’s servant, and then
tried to find Dr. Mabuse’s number in the telephone
book, but it was not given there. Yet
Mabuse had a telephone, for the Count had rung
him up from this very house. The Privy Councillor
knew the number.</p>

<p>When Wenk, having obtained the telephone
number from Herr Wendel, gave it, there was
no reply. Ringing up the exchange, he was told
that the telephone had been disconnected. He
asked who had had it three weeks before, but
this could not be ascertained at once.</p>

<p>Again Wenk rang up the Councillor. Dr.
Mabuse had changed his number; did he happen
to know his address? Wendel could give no information.
He only knew the telephone number,
and spoke to him on the phone. Wenk then
asked at the Police Registry Office for Dr.
Mabuse’s address, but the name was not to be
found anywhere among the arrivals in Munich,
and when, at the Municipal Registry, all the old
telephone books were searched to find Mabuse,
he was again unsuccessful.</p>

<p>Thereupon Wenk repaired to the manager of
the telephone exchange in order to make a more
thorough search. The manager took him to the
inquiry-room, where two young women were employed,
and he asked them to look again for the
number he had telephoned about.</p>

<p>“What were you wanting?” asked the elder
of the two, and Wenk explained that he was
seeking the address of a Dr. Mabuse, who
three weeks before had a telephone number that
did not appear in the directory.</p>

<p>The girl said she could not find it anywhere,
whereupon Wenk returned to the manager with
this information. He declared this was something
quite unheard of, and himself accompanied
Wenk to the inquiry office. He, too, made a
search with the clerks, but could find nothing.
While the manager was looking through the lists
without success, an idea occurred to Wenk, and
when he was informed that no one of the name
of Mabuse had been entered on the list at all
for the last year, he asked the manager for the
telephone number and address of a man named
Poldringer. As he uttered this name he saw
the elder girl start and then immediately recover
herself, but an instant later she told him rudely
that there were ever so many Poldringers in
Munich, and without the Christian name and the
exact address she could not furnish any information.</p>

<p>Then Wenk turned to the manager, saying
politely, “I am sorry to have to put you to
some inconvenience, but I must take both these
ladies into custody!”</p>

<p>He at once took up a position between the
girls and the telephone. “Be so good as to
sit down on these chairs till the detectives arrive;
you here, and your companion there!” The elder
of the girls turned as white as a sheet. The
other blushed, and then began to cry. Wenk
said, turning to her, “It is only a formality.
If you behave properly, this matter can be
carried through without exciting notice, and it
is probable that it will not be long before the
mystery is cleared up.” Then he rang up the
Criminal Investigation Department and asked for
three detectives.</p>

<p>The manager looked through the list of
Poldringers, for there were many entries under
the name, most of them being tradespeople. One,
of whom no further information was given, was
living in the Xenienstrasse, and another, without
any professional status, in the Ludwigstrasse.</p>

<p>The girls were given in charge, and Wenk
went to the Ludwigstrasse. He came to a
lodging-house, looked at the surroundings and inspected
the inside, and then went to the Xenienstrasse.
Then suddenly his heart stood still, for
in the Xenienstrasse, at the address given under
the name of Poldringer in the telephone list, he
saw on a professional plate the words</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Dr. Mabuse</span>,<br/>
<span class="indentleft"><i>Neurologist</i>.</span></p>

<p>He hastened away, merely noting the numbers
of the houses standing near. The street consisted
of detached villas. A mist swam before his eyes,
and the blood pounded in his pulses; there was
a sound as of pistols in his ears. He had his
man. No, he had not got him, but at last he
knew who he was!</p>

<p>Before doing anything else he drove to the
prison, for the time Cara Carozza had demanded
had now expired, and what she might tell him
would probably set the seal upon the success of
his enterprise.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Early that morning, when it was time for the
warder of the women’s prison to make his first
round, the door of Cara’s cell was opened. The
dancer was still asleep. She was shaken by the
shoulder and, awaking quickly, found the warder
bending over her, yet it was not the warder,
it was Spoerri. Surely she was dreaming? But
no, she was still in prison. How came Spoerri
to her bedside? She put her hand to her eyes
to shut out the vision, and yet she knew in her
heart it was reality. Spoerri was standing there.
He said to her:</p>

<p>“Surely you know that I am in league with
the warder?” She nodded. “Then you know,
too, that he told me what happened yesterday when
the State Attorney came to see you?”</p>

<p>“What did he tell you?” the girl asked breathlessly.</p>

<p>“That you are going to betray the master!”</p>

<p>The dancer sprang out of bed. “Who says
so?” she shouted.</p>

<p>“Please don’t talk so loudly. The warder says
so.”</p>

<p>“It is a lie.”</p>

<p>“The warder would have no interest in lying.”</p>

<p>“Did he tell the doctor so?” she asked
anxiously, and Spoerri lied in answer:</p>

<p>“Yes, of course he did, and the doctor sent
me to you.”</p>

<p> “It is a lie,” cried Cara again, on the verge
of tears; “I was going to save him!”</p>

<p>“How can you prove that?”</p>

<p>“I was going to save him, I tell you. Spoerri,
danger is threatening him.”</p>

<p>“Danger is always threatening him. That’s
mere nonsense. Can you prove what you say?”</p>

<p>Cara hastily related what had passed between
her and Wenk. Spoerri answered indifferently:</p>

<p>“I mean, can you prove it beyond all shadow
of doubt? But be quick, please, for I must get
away from here in five minutes.”</p>

<p>“What can I do to make the doctor believe
me?” asked the girl in despair.</p>

<p>“I must tell you that the doctor is very disturbed,
for he could not have believed it of you.”</p>

<p>“No, no, I could never have done it,” she
stammered, thoroughly downcast; “but how am
I to prove that I didn’t ... how can I prove
it? Surely <i>you</i> know, Spoerri, that....”</p>

<p>Then Spoerri with a smile drew out of his
pocket a small flask. “The proof lies there,”
he said.</p>

<p>“Where?” asked the distracted girl.</p>

<p>“In here, my pretty one; don’t you see?”</p>

<p>“I don’t understand you,” said the dancer.</p>

<p>“Oh, you don’t need to understand, my child,
only to drink. Just one little mouthful to swallow
and then the doctor will know your word was to
be relied on.”</p>

<p>Cara looked horrorstruck at the little flask.
“What is it?” she asked.</p>

<p>“A heavenly drink, my pretty one, nothing that
hurts one in the least. The doctor himself made
it up. But mind you throw the bottle out of the
window quickly! See, I am opening it for you.
Be sure you don’t forget that! And be quick
about it, do you hear? Throw it away <i>at once</i>,
for if there’s no bottle to be seen, nobody will
know what has happened. That’s what the doctor
expects of you; that is a proof that no one can
doubt. Besides, you know us. Even your
husband....”</p>

<p>With that he drew a knife out of his pocket,
playing with it lightly. He threw it at the door,
and it stuck there with the point transfixed. He
pulled it out and put it away again.</p>

<p>“Do you see that?” he said. “Now I must
be going. Well, au revoir!”</p>

<p>He was about to leave, but Cara sprang towards
him and clung to his knees, sobbing.</p>

<p>“But I am still so young, and I love life.
I have been very useful to him. I was hoping
to be set free ... by him. Set free at any
rate, even if he can never love me again.”</p>

<p>“Well, I can only tell you,” answered Spoerri,
“that he is very much disturbed about all this.
You can take it or leave it.”</p>

<p>Then the girl said, “Then I will free myself
of this existence. I will show him, a thousand
times over, that he can trust me. I will give
my life for him....”</p>

<p>“Oh, spare me your heroics!” said Spoerri
roughly.</p>

<p>But the girl went on unheeding, “What am I
after all?—a mere shadow following him about
and hiding out of his sight, but yet unable to
part from him. Yes, I will prove it, a thousand
times over.... I will free myself....”</p>

<p> “Well, if we are taken by surprise now, it will
be a hanging matter for us both; he told me
so. And who knows whether they won’t even get
<i>him</i>?”</p>

<p>Then Cara became suddenly calm, and said
quietly, “It is all right; you can go. And tell
him.... No, you needn’t say anything. I don’t
want anything more from him....”</p>

<p>Spoerri left hastily, leaving the little flask in
Cara’s hand. It was now warm from her fevered
touch.</p>

<p>“He does not believe me,” she said to herself
tremblingly. “The Doctor will never believe
me again. Strange—and yet, can there be any
greater proof to offer that I was always faithful
to him? Oh life! base, incomprehensible, disturbing
life! This terrible life of mine! Come!”
she said, apostrophizing the flask; “we will show
him there is nothing to fear from me. We will
prove it to you, you ... king of men ... you
enchanting murderer! you sublime destroyer! my
horror and my bliss!...”</p>

<p>She shouted aloud, then she grew fearful lest
her cries might endanger the beloved life, and
she snatched the stopper out of the bottle. Standing
upright in the middle of the cell, she drank,
a moment later throwing the bottle out of the
window, where the sun streaming in proclaimed
the morning of a new day.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Wenk faced the curator of the women’s prison.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, we were sorry to be unable to inform
you, but it was not possible to communicate with
you. The doctor says it must have been a heart-stroke,
for she was found lying dead in her cell
this morning.”</p>

<p>Amazed and horrified, Wenk entered the cell.
It was empty, the straw pallet bare. Cara’s
clothing lay on a stool. Wenk looked round,
and was about to leave when he saw something
shining on the window-ledge. He went back and
examined it, and found it was a small piece of
glass, rounded in shape, with a very strong odour
clinging to it. Wenk jumped on a chair and
found another piece of glass outside. Then he
went down into the courtyard, and very soon had
collected all the other pieces of the bottle. It
had broken against one of the window-bars.
He had the glass tested, and there were evidences
of poison upon it.</p>

<p>He walked back to his chambers—pondering
over this new occurrence. “Another victim!” he
said to himself repeatedly. One more sacrifice,
a real sacrifice, for this one had sacrificed herself.
This light-of-love had offered her life as a sacrifice
to her love. She had not meant to tell him anything—he
realized that now. She merely wanted
to put him on the wrong track that she might
have a chance to warn the criminal. “I have
no success with my women helpers,” he thought
sadly, asking how it was that these steadfast souls
should be found on the side of evil rather than
good—always on the side of evil, it seemed to
him. When the dancer was buried next day, he
was the only outsider present, and he returned
to his chambers slowly and sadly.</p>

<p>There, however, plenty of work was awaiting
him. His idea was to seize Dr. Mabuse in his
own home, and first of all he must ascertain when
he was sure to be found at home, and the two
confederates must be secured at the same time,
the one at the Xenienstrasse and the other in the
Schachen villa; there must be no time for one
of them to inform the other.</p>

<p>His preparations must be complete, down to
the very last detail, and then a surprise attack,
which must not last more than three minutes, could
be made. It was clear that a man who could
boldly carry through such crimes as these, in the
very heart of the city and in the teeth of the
highest civil powers, would have secured himself
against all possible emergencies in his own
quarters. That was undoubtedly the case, and all
these careful preparations of Wenk’s required time.</p>

<p>First of all, he must be able to secure one of
the neighbouring villas as his post of observation.
It was here that he laid claim to Herr von Hull’s
help. He drove straight to him, asking, “Can
you do me a very great service? Will you employ
a confidential agent to lease a floor of one of the
houses No. 26 or 28 in the Xenienstrasse, or,
better still, the whole villa? I want it just as
it is, and to be able to go in the day after
to-morrow. The question of expense need not be
considered. I shall want the house for two or
three weeks. Spring is approaching, and there
may be someone who wants money for a little trip
out of town.” The old gentleman promised to
do what he could in the matter. Then Wenk
asked the police inspector who had engaged him
for the road-engine, to come to town. He arrived
by the 11 a.m. express.</p>

<p> “Matters are approaching a climax, inspector,”
said Wenk. “You must be ready to take action
at any moment. I will leave the plan of it to
you. You have had plenty of time to get to
know the geography of the place and the opportunities
it affords, but the very moment you receive
my order to surround Villa Elise, you must go at
it, hell for leather. You must get your man,
alive or dead. We shall put another motor-boat
on the lake, and you can double your force on
shore. The road-engine can be moved away now.
The spring season is just beginning in Schachen,
so you and six or eight of your men can be
visitors to the lake-side!”</p>

<p>At seven o’clock next morning the inspector
returned to his post, and at eleven o’clock old Hull
came with the lease of villa 26 in the Xenienstrasse.</p>

<p>“There is a young couple living there,” he
said, “whom my suggestion exactly suited. They
wanted to go to Switzerland to visit their parents,
but were frightened at the cost of the railway fare.
I offered them five-thousand marks for a month’s
rent of the villa, and they will change them in
France. I am afraid I am causing a loss to our
exchange....”</p>

<p>“But you are benefiting your country in another
way, Herr Hull, and that you will very soon
find out!” said Wenk.</p>

<p>“You can take possession of the villa at six
o’clock to-night!”</p>

<p>At six o’clock, Wenk, disguised as a cyclist
messenger, went into the empty villa, leaving his
bicycle outside. He was quite alone in the house,
and at once sought for a window which would
afford him vantage ground. He concealed himself
behind a lace curtain and began to watch the
street. The first thing he noticed was that after
he had been there about a quarter of an hour
someone stole his bicycle and made off with it.
He had never seen a thief actually at work before;
this side of his calling was presented to him for
the first time to-day. He regarded it as a favourable
omen, being much amused by the comic haste
with which the thief had looked round him on
all sides, although he was even then straddling
the machine.</p>

<p>For two hours he kept watch on the front door,
side door, window and roof of Mabuse’s villa. No
one went out or in, and though Wenk remained
on the watch till midnight, nothing was to be
seen. He fell asleep at the window, woke and
watched again, and then slept once more, finally
awaking in broad daylight. His servant brought
him a meal prepared in a restaurant near. It was
a long vigil, and Wenk, bringing the telephone
to the window, held conversations with acquaintances
and with some members of the police
force.</p>

<p>At last, towards six o’clock in the evening, a
car drew up and immediately drove away again.
A gentleman went up to the front door. Was it
Mabuse? No, this was an old gentleman, with
the feeble and uncertain step of a paralytic.
Possibly he was a patient.</p>

<p>Soon after that Wenk saw a chimney-sweep
leave the house. He went along quickly and
cheerfully, puffing away at a cigarette. Wenk had
not seen the sweep go in; that must have been
mere chance, though. The old invalid seemed
to be there a long time; could he be waiting
for the Doctor? Perhaps, though, he was one
of his assistants. It seemed hardly likely. However,
he must do nothing rash.</p>

<p>Twilight was already advanced when a man
with a parcel rang at the front door, which was
opened with surprising promptness. Half an
hour later this man came out again, and so it
went on. Even through the night people kept
coming and going, and next day it was the same
story.</p>

<p>On the third day Wenk was called up early
by his man. The Criminal Investigation Department
had some important information for him.
Something had happened during the night at a
gaming-den. Would he like an official to bring
him a report? Yes, he replied, but the detective
should come in some sort of uniform.</p>

<p>Half an hour later the detective, got up as a
telephone repairer, appeared and told his story.
Last night a young man had come to the guard-room
and said that he and others had been
playing baccarat in a secret gaming-house. An
old gentleman, who seemed to be partially
paralysed, was playing too, and he always lost
his money. When it was just upon three o’clock
in the morning, the old gentleman had a sudden
fit of rage, shouted out something, and immediately
three men, who had also been playing, leaped
on the table. They drew out revolvers, shouting
“Hands up!” Then a fourth man went from one
visitor to another, searching their pockets and
taking all their money away, as well as that
lying on the table. They had taken twelve
thousand marks from the man who was telling
the story. When they came to the old gentleman
they left him alone, and he suddenly stood up
and walked out as if there was nothing the matter
with him. Two of the thieves accompanied him,
and the others protected him from behind, and
outside there were two cars waiting.</p>

<p>This story excited Wenk greatly. It did not
interfere with his scheme, but, on the contrary,
it showed that Mabuse felt himself secure. Yet
while Wenk was here in a strange house behind
a curtain like a sleepy bat, the criminal was going
his accustomed way, calmly, boldly, as if he had
nothing and nobody to fear. After all, it was
quite natural. Why should he not go free when
the man who had sworn to bring him to justice
was in hiding here behind a window curtain!</p>

<p>Taking a sudden resolve, Wenk left his post,
and did not return till evening. He had given
an order to extinguish the street-lamp in front
of Mabuse’s house by breaking the glass and
damaging the electric light bulb. It was a dark
night, and as soon as Mabuse’s windows showed
no light Wenk entered the garden. He was
carrying a canister filled with fine meal, and he
clambered over the fence into Mabuse’s grounds and
went cautiously along the garden path, scattering
the meal in a thin layer over part of the short walk
between the garden gate and the house. Then he
hurried back over the fence to his own garden
and into No. 26 again.</p>

<p>Half an hour later someone left Mabuse’s house,
but Wenk could not see who. After an hour and
a half, he heard steps in the street passing beneath
his window. He saw a man wearing military
dress, who went quickly to Mabuse’s door and
disappeared within the house.</p>

<p>Wenk went downstairs again and hid behind
a shrub in the garden. After a long time he
heard Mabuse’s front door open, and in the starlight
he could see that a stout, elderly lady was
leaving the house. She went into the street, where
a car seemed to spring up from nowhere. She
got into it and drove rapidly away.</p>

<p>Wenk clambered over the hedge between his
and Mabuse’s garden, crept on all fours over the
grass to the garden path, and examined the ground
by the help of his electric torch. Then he saw
that the footsteps of all three persons were exactly
the same. Therefore, whoever it was who came
out first, and the soldier, and the elderly lady,
were one and the same person. And then it
occurred to him that yesterday and the day before
yesterday the chimney-sweep, the paralytic, the
messenger with his parcel, were the same person,
and this person was—Mabuse. Wenk carefully
removed the traces of the meal.</p>

<p>To-night must lead to some conclusion or other.
In both the nearest guardrooms special police were
ready, fully armed, prepared to break in at any
moment. When Wenk knew Mabuse to be safe
at home, he would hasten to No. 26, send a
telephone call, and three minutes later Mabuse’s
house would be surrounded by police. To burst
the door would be the work of thirty seconds.
Six men would remain outside and surround the
house. The other six would join him in a rush
on the place. When Mabuse was secured, the
order to Schachen would go through.</p>

<p>Wenk stole rapidly back to his own garden,
stretched himself flat on the ground and waited.
The earth radiated the warmth of this day of
late spring, and he felt the power that lay in the
soil. And in an attitude of tense expectancy,
two hours, one hour, perhaps even minutes only
before his work would be crowned with success,
it seemed to Wenk as if music, a music betraying
the secrets of all hearts, stole over his senses.
Tears filled his eyes, and his bare fingers caressed
the fragrant ground. He felt as if it were the
very essence of manhood laid bare, the manhood
for which he was risking his life.</p>

<p>He had decided to lie here waiting until
Mabuse, in some disguise or other, should return
to the house. Nothing could go wrong now.
When the other was once more inside, like a
mouse caught in a trap, Wenk would hasten back
and breathe his order into the telephone.</p>

<p>But before this could happen he was to undergo
a strange experience, something which made his
heart stand still and a cry by which he had almost
betrayed himself pass his lips. A car came
up the street, and stopped with a noisy shriek in
front of the house. But no one got out. No, it
was Mabuse’s door which opened, and in the person
descending the steps, and pausing in the glow of
the headlights, Wenk recognized the Countess.</p>

<p>If he had not pressed his lips to the ground
that very instant, his cry must have betrayed him.
The car hastened back whence it had come.
“Wife-robber! Husband-murderer!” raged Wenk.
So this was the secret of Count Told’s death.
“The man is a devil and a werwolf!” he cried.</p>

<p>Suddenly he felt the cold night penetrating his
clothing, and he found himself trembling. Was
he going to have an attack of ague now, at the
very last minute? He struggled to subdue the
feelings that threatened to overcome him. In the
still night he heard the hammering of the pulses
in his brain, and he bent all his energies to the
task of listening for what was to happen.</p>

<p>Twelve o’clock struck, and it seemed as if the
town were shaken by the powerful strokes, as if
these beats must penetrate into the very heart
of this house which sheltered the monster, and
every vibration become a dagger hacking him to
pieces.</p>

<p>The clock had ceased striking, and a footstep
sounded, but whether near or far-off Wenk could
not at first determine, for the throbbing in his
ears. Suddenly the garden gate creaked, and in
the starlight he saw a broad expanse of white
shirt-front. A man advanced rapidly to Mabuse’s
door, and in the instant that he stood on the
doorstep, waiting for it to open, the starlight
revealed to Wenk that the figure was that of
the man he was seeking. And now the net was
closing around the victim.</p>

<p>Wenk waited three minutes, four minutes.
Would not the world come to an end during
these moments? Might not the skies fall, and
the last judgment begin?</p>

<p>Then he pulled himself together and climbed
stiffly over the fence to return to No. 26. He
rushed upstairs in the darkness, seized the
telephone, called for the number and gave the
guard-room the orders he had arranged. He had
but to name the street and give the number of
the house, which till now he had kept a secret.</p>

<p>A motor-cyclist was to go to the second guard-room
directly the telephone message was received.
The car containing the first relay of police was to
follow him immediately, and at the second guard-room
those aroused by the cyclist’s warning were
to be ready to get in the car and proceed with
the others at full speed to the villa. Thus it had
been arranged.</p>

<p>After Wenk had telephoned he hastened downstairs
again. He stood in the dark entrance,
waiting for the first sound of the approaching car.
Was he not consumed with fever? No, he bit
his lips firmly, made his muscles taut and commanded
himself to keep cool. He must be cold
and hard as steel. Steel it should be!</p>

<p>He had not long to wait.</p>


		</section>
	</body>
</html>
