<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			
<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>

<p> The distinguished-looking elderly gentleman introduced
himself and, as usual, nobody caught
the name. He wore a suit of fashionable and
well-cut clothes, however, and his scarf-pin was
a single white pearl in a somewhat quaint setting,
its dazzling purity recalling the whiteness of a
lovely blonde’s shoulders, as Karstens remarked.
Moreover, he at once placed a sum of twenty
thousand marks upon the table in front of him.</p>

<p>He had been brought to the club by young
Hull, the heir to an industrial concern worth
millions, into which his father allowed him to
dip freely. Play was started immediately, and
the stranger courteously agreed to the game
proposed, which was vingt-et-un. The stakes were
unlimited, and the first one to hold the bank
was Ritter.</p>

<p>At first there was nothing unusual about the
game. Gains and losses alternated, but soon it
was noticed that Hull was losing, and this began
just at the time when it was the elderly gentleman’s
turn to play banker. At the start it was
hundred-mark notes that Hull lost, but he played
on calmly, resigned to his ill-luck. Notes of
smaller value were now mingled with the piles
of thousands the visitor had put in front of him.</p>

<p>It was only outwardly, however, that Hull
appeared undisturbed. He felt a good deal of
excitement within, and a veil seemed to be
obscuring his mental vision. His bank-notes
fluttered across to the stranger without his appearing
aware of the fact. His senses seemed to be
imprisoned in a delicate, invisible web, pressing
ever more and more closely upon him.</p>

<p>He drank a brandy and soda, and then ordered
a bottle of champagne. The only effect of that
was to make him open another compartment of
his pocket-book and bring out the thousand-mark
notes which he had procured from the bank that
morning. His bad luck became really fantastic.
Even when he held good cards it seemed as if
in some obscure region of his mind a mysterious
warning sealed his lips, and instead of staking
a substantial sum, he wagered a trifling amount
merely.</p>

<p>It was now the visitor’s turn to pass on the
office of banker, but he volunteered to continue
to hold it on account of Hull. He said: “If you
gentlemen do not object, I will remain banker
for a few more rounds. You see how the money
seems to cling to me. I am the guest of your
hospitable club, so please consider how difficult
my position is with regard to Herr von Hull, and
grant my request.” His speech was polite, and
carefully enunciated, yet there was a masterful
ring about the words, as if the speaker would
brook no refusal.</p>

<p>The club attendant eyed the guest suspiciously,
but he was using the cards provided by the club
and fresh packs were opened every time. The
play grew more animated. A good deal had
been drunk, and several round the table were
slightly intoxicated. The guest did not refrain
from drinking, and his behaviour was in no way
peculiar. He had a steady and lingering glance
for everyone who looked at him, and his large
grey eyes seemed to have something dominating
about them, hardly in accordance with a mere
game. His hands were large and fleshy, and as
steady as if carved out of wood, while the fingers
of the other men, far younger than he, were
already quivering with excitement.</p>

<p>Hull continued playing, though his pocket-book
grew lighter and lighter. “What is the matter
with me?” he continually asked himself. He
wanted to rise from the table and miss a round,
so that he could get a mouthful of fresh
air at the window and gain a little calm from
looking into the silent night. But he sat as if
glued to his chair, pressing his elbows down on
the crimson cloth, and his thoughts escaped his
control, falling into a void like that of deep
slumber.</p>

<p>And yet he was not really a reckless player.
He was accustomed to reflect and to follow the
run of luck, making use of chances that were
favourable to him, and reducing his stakes when
he saw that the odds were against him.</p>

<p>This evening, however, he seemed to know no
bounds. No amount seemed of any value in his
eyes, and it appeared as if he were almost glad
to lose, and saw his notes change hands with
a kind of satisfaction. Something would be sure
to happen ere long. The players seemed far too
slow in dealing, he thought; they took an endless
time in declaring their stakes, and the notes
crawled round the table at a snail’s pace.</p>

<p>He drank freely, moreover, and the fancies which
he could no longer control were like fiery steeds
escaping the driver’s restraining hand and running
away into a trackless wilderness. The very air
seemed to have been exhausted, and nothing existed
for him but the game.</p>

<p>Folks began to discuss his bad luck. He
certainly drew unlucky cards, but he was playing
his hand badly, and taking unreasonable risks.
His friends wanted to restrict the stakes and talk
of the final round. At first Hull did not take in
what they were saying, and they had to explain
their words; then he drew himself up and became
furiously angry, shouting in his wrath and beating
his fist on the table.</p>

<p>Then the stranger’s big eyes seemed to withdraw
a little from him and the rest; their glance
appeared to be directed inward and some of their
lustre vanished. He laid down his cards and put
his money into his pocket, doing it carelessly, however,
as if it were merely a handkerchief. There
was one more round to finish. Hull called out,
“I’ll play the bank,” and the stranger dealt him
the cards. He glanced at them quickly. His
total was twenty-one.... Then something happened,
something strange and inexplicable. He
threw his cards face downwards upon the heap,
saying, “I have lost again.”</p>

<p>The guest immediately showed <i>his</i> cards. His
eyes regained their glitter, he counted his points,
named the total, and threw his cards down on
the table.</p>

<p>It seemed to Hull as if he were falling from an
unsteady foothold down into an abyss below.
“What have I been doing?” he asked himself
in stupefaction and despair. Now at last he began
to see everything as clearly as if he had just
come into the room: the three glowing electric
globes under their protecting dome, the red-covered,
lighted table, his friends, the elderly
stranger, the scattered cards and the piles of
notes.</p>

<p>“Where have I been? What have I been
doing?” he stammered.</p>

<p>His brain grew alert again, and the thoughts
that had been so confused and obscure now became
suddenly clear: it was as if he had drawn aside
the curtains and let in the light of day. Then he
felt a sudden distrust of himself, which made him
uneasy. He held his head in his hands awhile,
striving to free it from the weight that seemed
to encircle it, and then raising himself erect, he
said, “What have I been doing? I held twenty-one
in my hand, and then someone called out, in my
voice, ‘I have lost again.’ Look there!” He
snatched the cards he had thrown away from the
heap where they lay, and turned them over. They
were an ace, a ten, and a knave—twenty-one!</p>

<p>The elderly stranger’s large grey eyes contracted
until the pupils were quite small and seemed to
be gazing at a far-distant spot. A shudder went
through his body; it was perceptible, though
hastily subdued. Then his breast expanded and
his breath came slowly and with difficulty, as if
he were having to pump the air direct into himself.</p>

<p>“Too late!” said he, briefly and decisively.</p>

<p>Hull made a slight gesture.</p>

<p>“My remark had nothing to do with you,” he
said quietly; “it concerned myself only. How
much do I owe you?” he asked in a friendly tone.</p>

<p>“Thirty thousand marks!”</p>

<p>Hull emptied his pocket-book.</p>

<p>“You must content yourself till to-morrow afternoon
with ten thousand and, of course, an I O U for
the rest. Will you be so good as to write the
amount and your address in this notebook?”</p>

<p>When Hull got his little notebook back, he
read in it:</p>

<p class="center"><span class="indentright">BALLING,</span><br/>

<span class="smcap">Room 15, Excelsior Hotel</span>.</p>

<p>He passed over his I O U, smiling pleasantly as
he did so.</p>

<p>“I am ready to give you your revenge, Herr von
Hull,” said Balling, as he rose. “Gentlemen, may
I offer you my thanks for the evening’s hospitality?
Good-night!”</p>

<p>He said this almost abruptly, but in so decisive
a tone that it brought the others to their feet.
Karstens offered him his car.</p>

<p>“No, thank you; my own is waiting for me.”</p>

<p>He walked away somewhat stiffly, as though
tired out, and vouchsafed no further farewell of
any sort. The club attendant conducted him to
the outer door.</p>

<p>“Hull, you are off your head,” said Karstens,
when the stranger had left the room.</p>

<p> “What did really happen?” asked Hull quietly.</p>

<p>“Ask your purse!”</p>

<p>“My pocket-book is empty. Who won all my
money?”</p>

<p>“Your friend there,” said Karstens, pointing to
the door.</p>

<p>“My friend! I never set eyes on him before!
How did he get here?”</p>

<p>“Hull, you certainly are needing the services
of a good physician. Emil, bring the telephone
directory.” Karstens turned over the leaves.
“Here we are: Dr. Schramm, Psychopathological
treatment, 35, Ludwigstrasse....”</p>

<p>“I don’t understand your joke, my dear
Karstens.”</p>

<p>“Well, who brought this fine vingt-et-un player
here but you?”</p>

<p>“That is not true, Karstens.”</p>

<p>“Go to No. 35, Ludwigstrasse, my dear fellow,
and quickly too.”</p>

<p>“Of course it was you who brought him, Hull,”
said another.</p>

<p>“<i>I?</i> <i>I</i> brought him? At any rate, I don’t
remember a thing about it, but it may be so.”</p>

<p>Hull then withdrew, exhausted and stupefied,
brooding over the problem which had so strangely
and suddenly opened up before him that evening.</p>

<p>When he awoke, towards morning, he had a
dim and fleeting remembrance, and he seemed to
recall the stranger sitting at the same table with
him in the Café Bastin. He had an idea that they
had been talking together, and that it was about
the theatre, but what they had said, and which
theatre it was about, he had not the slightest idea.
In the dim recesses of his mind he recalled merely
the sensation of a dazzling reflector that seemed
to throw its beams upon him during the conversation.
Sleep was no longer possible, but, try
as he would to pierce these elusive fragments of
memory and penetrate to the reality behind them,
he was quite unable to make anything out of
them.</p>

<hr/>

<p>The next afternoon brought him no enlightenment
either. By four o’clock he had obtained the twenty
thousand marks, and he made his way to the Excelsior
Hotel. At his request a telephone message was
sent to Room 15. Herr Balling was there, he
was told, and requested the gentleman to send up
his card. This Hull did, following close upon it.</p>

<p>In the middle of Room 15 he found a man
whom he had never seen in his life before. He
was a short, stout, clean-shaven man, apparently
an American. He made a very stiff bow.</p>

<p>“I beg your pardon,” said Hull. “I must
have been directed wrongly. I wanted Room 15.”</p>

<p>“This is it,” said the other.</p>

<p>“Then Herr Balling must have given me the
wrong number.”</p>

<p>“My name is Balling.”</p>

<p>“This time I am <i>not</i> dreaming, I am in full
possession of my senses,” said Hull to himself,
and then aloud, he continued: “But the mystery
can soon be explained. Did you write this?”
and he extended the notebook in which the stranger
of the previous night had written his name and
address.</p>

<p>“Certainly not,” replied the stout man.</p>

<p> “Then I am not in your debt to the tune of
twenty thousand marks?”</p>

<p>“My time is very limited, and I am expecting
a friend on business,” said the other, looking at
his watch.</p>

<p>“I will make way for your friend, sir, at once,
and will only put one more question to you. It
is not my fault that I am bothering you; I have
been misled in some way.”</p>

<p>The other nodded.</p>

<p>“Possibly you are acquainted,” Hull went on,
“with a gentleman of about sixty, with large grey
eyes, a big nose and white whiskers. He wears
good and well-cut clothes and a tall grey hat, and
his name is also Balling.”</p>

<p>“I can only repeat that I know nothing about
him,” said the Balling of No. 15.</p>

<p>Hull thereupon took his leave. Downstairs he
asked whether there were a second Herr Balling
in the hotel, but the answer was “No.” Had
Room 15 been occupied by any Herr Balling who
had just left? “No.” Was the writing in the
pocket-book known? Again there was a negative
reply. “For the first time in my life,” thought
Hull, “I find myself unable to pay a debt of
honour.”</p>

<p>Gradually he became uneasy. What a
mysterious affair this was! Nothing of the kind
had ever occurred before. He had won money
and lost it again ... sometimes much, and at
other times little. He had been in financial
straits. He had had some trouble about a girl he
cared for. Once, indeed, he had been seriously
wounded in a duel. Yet all that was comprehensible
and straightforward, so to speak. But
this tale of Herr Balling and the twenty thousand
marks had some mystery or other behind it. He
had forgotten that it was he who introduced the
stranger to the club. He had played as if he had
lost his head. He had incurred a debt of twenty
thousand marks, and his creditor had furnished a
name and address which did actually exist but were
not his, and, moreover, he would not have the
money....</p>

<p>If it had not happened that Hull had no mistress
at the moment, he could have talked this affair
over. He pondered over it alone while he walked
along Lenbach Square and the Promenade, looking
everybody in the face in the hope that he might
encounter the distinguished stranger among them.
He went to the Café Bastin and scanned all the
faces there. He sat down at a table and waited
to see whether the <i>genius loci</i> would be favourable
to him and recall the vanished recollections; but
nothing came of it, and he stood up again, a prey
to increasing uneasiness. It seemed as if in the
invisible depths behind him another power, extraneous
to himself, was pursuing him, pressing down
upon him, trying to jump on his back as a monkey
might do, and lead him into unlucky adventures
of some kind or another.</p>

<p>Hull forced himself to return to his lonely
bachelor chambers. There he met Karstens, and
greeted him with relief. But Karstens at once
asked:</p>

<p>“Well, has your memory returned?”</p>

<p>“My dear fellow, there’s something wrong with
me!”</p>

<p> “With the twenty thousand marks?”</p>

<p>“No, there they are!” and he tapped his breast-pocket.
“Nobody wants them, it appears. There
is a Herr Balling in Room 15 at the ‘Excelsior,’
but he isn’t my man, and we’ve never met before.
He has never played vingt-et-un, and nobody owes
<i>him</i> twenty thousand marks. I can’t get rid of the
money, and it makes me feel creepy! Something is
going to happen to me. Who <i>is</i> there near me
whom I cannot see? There’s certainly something
wrong with me!”</p>

<p>“Come to the club! Perhaps your Herr Balling
will go there to fetch the money himself.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but what about the real Balling
in No. 15?”</p>

<p>“Well, that’s certainly odd, I grant you. Come
along.”</p>

<p>“All right. Perhaps he’ll be there.”</p>

<p>In the club that night there was no play. The
curious circumstance had so worked upon the
members’ imagination that no one felt the need
of trying his luck. Hull was overwhelmed with
well-meaning or obtuse advice.</p>

<p>“Emil,” said one of them to the attendant,
“what did his car look like?”</p>

<p>“An excellent one, Herr Baron, a twenty-horsepower
at the least—a closed car with a body like
a royal cradle, if one may use such a comparison
nowadays ... so smooth and well rounded and
polished. It started off with a great bound, and
soon vanished. It was a first-class car. I kept
a close eye on the gentleman, and I saw that he
had the devil’s own luck when he played against
Herr von Hull. He played quite straight, however.”</p>

<p> They learnt nothing more about the stranger.
Nobody came either to the club or to Hull’s rooms
to ask for the twenty thousand marks or to offer
him his revenge.</p>

<p>A few days afterwards Hull made acquaintance
with a girl who was performing jazz dances in the
Bonbonnière. She was partly Mexican, she told
him. She soon effected a diversion in his thoughts,
and in her company he rapidly got rid of the
twenty thousand marks which he could not pay
over to the stranger.</p>

<p>“It seems as if you were meant to give the
money to a woman instead of to a man,” remarked
Karstens, when he told him that he was
now free of his worries once more.</p>


		</section>
	</body>
</html>
