<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>

<p>Wenk ran full tilt past the servants at the door,
who stood with serious faces, laughing behind
their hands. He ran through the hall and the
open door on to the steps, clattered down them,
and flung open the door of the waiting car. It
sprang forward, and in a few moments had disappeared
in the dark avenue. In the hall Mabuse
stopped laughing to say, “He is going to the
Hell Café to fetch you some of the devil’s white
bread!”</p>

<p>The jerk with which the car started threw Wenk
back on to the seat, but scarcely had he touched
it than the cushions seemed to open and he sank
quickly into a hole in them. Something closed
together over him, and it creaked like iron. Then
he awoke from his hypnotic state. He lay there
in misery, unconscious how he had got into that
position, with his head hanging back, apparently
in some gap in the back seat. He tried to rise,
seeking painfully for ease and consciousness, but
he could not raise himself from the depths. Something
seemed to press him down again, and hard
unyielding fetters were crossed over him many
times. The motor went at furious speed, and
shook him against an iron grating which he soon
discovered to be the fetters that made an upright
position impossible. They pressed closely
down upon him. He made a furious effort to
throw them off, but soon found it was quite impossible.
He would only have his trouble for
his pains. He was absolutely done for. He was
himself the bird which had stepped on to the limed
twig!</p>

<p>With angry defiance he turned upon himself
saying, “That is as it should be! The stronger
one conquers, and you were the weaker!” But
why was he the weaker? Because he had undertaken
a task that from the very first exceeded
his powers. Each one knows his own capabilities.
But what had tempted him to undertake something
beyond him? Why, in the most forlorn and
miserable situation of his whole life—a situation
that seemed so incredible that he still had a faint
hope it might prove only a dream—why was
he able to guide and reason out his thoughts
like the solution of an arithmetical problem?
What was it that had enticed him? He knew
the answer. It was the good in him, the outcome
of his feeling of responsibility towards his fellow-countrymen.
He wanted to help them, and because
his conscience was stronger than his powers,
he had come to grief. If this experience were
to end in his death, at least he would die in a
good cause, and the soul-sparks which at his
death would flame up again in some other
existence would form a beacon to light others
upward.... He would live again in spirit among
men....</p>

<p>The sound of the motor echoed through the
forest, and Wenk heard it. What was the
enemy’s plan regarding him? The car raced on
through the night like a ship driven by the
typhoon. Where was it going? Whither were
they taking him? Was it to Munich? But, if so,
why? If they wanted to put him to death for
having disturbed the powers of evil and undermined
their efforts, why did they not take their
revenge at once, instead of delaying it for
hours?</p>

<p>He noticed that the windows of the car had no
blinds, and he saw stars gleaming fitfully through
the panes. They would not arrive in Munich till
the morning, and it would be impossible to drive
a fettered man by daylight over half Germany
in a car with the inside exposed. They were
carrying him off somewhere or other, but where?
Where could it be?</p>

<p>It must have been midnight when he left the
villa, but even that he did not know for certain,
for of all that had happened to him since the
moment when he had tested his pulse, he had
only a dim and hazy idea. They must certainly
be taking him to the place of execution now.</p>

<p>He recalled, with an endless yearning which
seemed to encompass him like the sea, his long-dead
father, and with all his energy he clung to
these recollections, melancholy as their associations
were. The jolting hither and thither of his
body in the car and the mental excitement under
which he was labouring made him sick, and in
his helpless state he could not even turn his head
aside. His brain lost the power of thinking in
clear outlines. Spectres arose around him and
devils played ball with him. They tossed him
backwards and forwards between the Carse of
Gowrie and Aconcagua, let him fall, and snatched
at him again, just as he was about to be dashed
to pieces on the Cape of Good Hope.</p>

<p>Then it seemed as if a gigantic black band
had stuffed him down in a cave as if he were
a sack. The walls of this cave were so close
that he could not lie down, but suddenly,
slowly, and yet without ceasing, they began to
grow. They did not grow apart, however, but
proceeded, always at the same pace, towards him,
and the moment was already close at hand when
they would crush his bones together and burst
his brains. Consciousness forsook him, and he
fell into a dreamlike condition, dominated by a
dull sense of impending death.</p>

<p>When he awoke he found himself stretched out
on a leather seat, the iron fetters no longer binding
him. But his arms were tied behind him, and
his legs were crossed on each other and fastened
together. A large handkerchief had been bound
over his face, so tightly as to be painful. It
covered his mouth altogether and made breathing
difficult.</p>

<p>It was now day, and he heard a rushing sound
that rose and fell at intervals. He soon recognized
it—it was the sea! A man looked down
upon him. The handkerchief covered one eye only,
and with the other he saw, over the edge of the
bandage, half the objects on his eye-level. He
did not know the man, who just then called to
another, “Come here! he is awake.” Then the
other came to look at him, and he too was a
complete stranger to Wenk. He heard them
talking, and one said to the other, “It is nearly
five o’clock. The Doctor must be here soon!”</p>

<p>The other answered, “If he said soon after
five, he will come then. We must be ready for
him!”</p>

<p>“Can’t you see anything yet?”</p>

<p>The two men went off. Wenk tried to raise
his head, but could not see beyond the frame of
the window. The country must be flat—there was
nothing but sky discernible.</p>

<p>“Give me the glass! There he is!” Wenk
heard suddenly.</p>

<p>“Now comes the decisive moment,” he thought,
and summoned all his powers to help him dispel
the dread ideas which crowded upon him.</p>

<p>The events that followed occurred in rapid
succession. The door of the car was flung open,
and hands gripped him by the shoulders, which
lay nearest the door. They dragged him out, his
feet striking painfully on the step and then on
the ground. The second man took his legs, and
they carried him a short distance. Then Wenk
saw sand-dunes in front of him, and a few steps
further the men had climbed with him to the top.</p>

<p>“Faster!” cried the man behind, as he turned
round and looked back over the landscape.</p>

<p>Wenk heard a motor-car, and said to himself,
“That is Mabuse coming!” Suddenly a light
awning appeared above him, and after a time he
recognized it for the wing of an aeroplane.</p>

<p>The two men arranged everything with hasty
movements. Wenk was laid on the sand, and
two cords tied together made a noose under his
chest and arms. One man raised his legs and
these were fastened by two cords which had been
attached somewhere to a pole rather high up.
A third leash was then slung round his hips.
It was not long before Wenk realized that he
was hanging bound to the outer wall of the
car of a flying-machine. He lay closely fastened
there like a package that was to be taken on a
journey. With his uncovered right eye he saw
beyond the edge of the bandage that the aeroplane
stood on a prepared landing-stage over a course
which sloped down to the sea. Beyond it stretched
the shore. It was ebb-tide.</p>

<p>“I am going to have a sea voyage,” cried a
despairing voice within Wenk sadly. “How long
it is since my last voyage. All the years of
war lie between, and yet now, for me, comes the
war—the bombshell is prepared.”</p>

<p>From the depths of his muscular being there
came an answer to this sad voice of despair.
He exerted his muscles against his bonds. His
body moved and wriggled in the nooses, and the
wing of the machine quivered beneath the shock,
and swayed above him.</p>

<p>Then a broad face and a high, well-formed head
bent over him, and two fiery eyes seemed to pierce
him through and through.</p>

<p>“Aha!” said the voice of the man who stood
above him.</p>

<p>“Yes, there is the foe, there is Mabuse,” thought
Wenk.</p>

<p>“Get in!” he heard him say, and there was
the rustling of a woman’s dress, and out of the
rustling a voice ... a voice that made his knees
tremble in their bonds. He knew that voice!
The rustling was louder and closer, and the
woman’s voice cried, “What is that?” Wenk
heard the horror, trouble and anxiety that spoke
in the voice as she put the question.</p>

<p>“Get in!” said Mabuse again. Then the voice,
the well-known, low, sweet voice of the Countess
Told, said in a tone of anxious entreaty, “What
are you doing with this man?”</p>

<p>Wenk said to himself, “She does not know
who I am.”</p>

<p>“Get in! He’s going to make the trip with
us, and we haven’t a third seat. Come along
quickly, now!” cried Mabuse.</p>

<p>Wenk saw Mabuse’s arm seize the woman and
lift her into the gondola, then he himself got
in, making use of Wenk’s body as a step, and
when he was settled in the pilot’s seat, not two
fingers’ breadth above Wenk, he bent down to him
and said in a harsh tone, “The gentleman is
going to accompany us on our journey—but
whither? Good luck!—All ready?” he called out
to the men.</p>

<p>“All quite ready, sir!”</p>

<p>The propeller hummed and the aeroplane glided
along the course so swiftly that the very moment
Wenk felt the throbbing of the engine its wheels
were already clear of the ground and the earth
vanished from his sight. The machine soared upwards
steeply, and it seemed to Wenk as if his
body were standing upright. No word was spoken
in the car. The air beat so heavily upon
him that it seemed like flying wood, and he soon
began to feel bitterly cold. The cold seemed
to cut through the wide opening of his evening
suit and strike at his very heart. He felt that
it pressed ever deeper and deeper within him, like
revolving knives. His hair was stiff and stood
on end, and it seemed as if needles were pricking
him all over. He had lost all capability of
thought, save for one idea. It dimly occurred to
him that he was enduring martyrdom, and that this
martyrdom was on account of the Countess Told,
whom he had once loved, at a time when such
love was not lawful.</p>

<p>Then he felt the blow of a fist on his head,
and a harsh voice asked, “Is twelve thousand feet
high enough for you?” A few moments later he
heard, “Or are you already dead—of fright?”</p>

<p>The voice died away and Wenk felt that the
aeroplane was being righted. When it was flying
level, a hand touched his head, hastily tearing
away his bonds. Then Wenk saw the face of
Mabuse bending over him. He was silent, but his
features were distorted with a malicious joy which
aroused horror. His grey eyes had neither shape
nor pupils; they were like old weather-beaten
stones, and, as Wenk recognized with a shudder,
they were glowering death at him. Then the
capacious mouth opened like the yawning chasm
in a rocky gorge, and the harsh voice said, “You
have dared to oppose your will against mine. You
are now facing your last moment, and I have
taken the gag from your mouth so that my ears
may enjoy the shriek with which you fall twelve
thousand feet down to your own world!”</p>

<p>Wenk heard his voice, and it sounded like
thunder rolling along after the lightning flash.
He saw that Mabuse was loosening the bonds
that held his legs. He tugged and tore at them.
Suddenly his legs were free. For a moment they
fell, then the leash that was bound round his
hips held them again, and the hands were now
busy with this. In a few seconds it was untied.</p>

<p>In his further fall Wenk’s body regained an
upright position, held only by the noose which
bound his chest to the wall of the car. He
suddenly felt that his hands were free, and at
this feeling he was fired with a sudden hope. In
the midst of his phantasies there surged upwards
like a fairy story the recollection of the Countess’s
beauty and sympathy. He had never forgotten
her, and now in the last moment of his life, when
she herself was so close to him, his feeling for her,
exalted to an undying and compassionate brotherhood,
was wafted as a cloud beyond the savage
and brutal murderer, to envelop the frail human
being beside him with indomitable pride and
courage.</p>

<p>Wenk saw her eyes, fluttering like birds shot
down in the clear blue ether, glance for a moment
beyond and above Mabuse’s eager bent head....
He saw her hands, tearing off their fur gloves,
cling white and trembling to Mabuse’s shoulder
as she strove to drag him back from his deadly
intent.</p>

<p>But Mabuse shook the woman off, and raised
his hands with mad rage to untie the last noose.
He tore undone the first of its fastenings, making
Wenk’s body sink deeper, and beat away Wenk’s
hands, which were seeking to maintain a grip
on the edge of the car, with his closed fists.</p>

<p>Then one last defiance of fate, arising from the
will to live, lent strength to Wenk’s voice as he
shouted in the air, “He is the murderer of Count
Told. He made him cheat at cards! He put
the razor into his hands that he might cut his
throat!”</p>

<p>A fist struck at his mouth, and blood spurted
from it, yet at this last moment of his life it
seemed as if his very blood were tasting the sweetness
of a noble spirit. Then a final effort was
made to release him from the bond that held
him. A fearful weight pressed on his head, rolled
over his body to press him downward. The
weight of it was immeasurable, black, imbued with
the swiftness of a raging storm. But all at once
the iron weight was removed. A part of it became
detached from the aeroplane, unrecognizable, and
sank. Wenk’s hands held the edge of the car as
in a vice. The aeroplane hovered and swayed
as if drunken with the high clear air.</p>

<hr/>

<p>This is what had happened:</p>

<p>When Count Told’s name rang through the air,
as if thrown from measureless space, it seemed to
the Countess as if she were awaking from a dream
at the bottom of a swamp. Since the night when
she had been torn from her husband and chained
to Mabuse’s wicked will, she had never spoken his
name, nor even thought of it. The memory had
crept into her inmost being and hidden itself
away, deep in the welter in which her life was inextricably
bound. It had been forced there by
the diabolic power of Mabuse’s lust for domination,
and the wife had suffered it in a kind of
subconscious self-defence. Were it not so, she
would have been absolutely and entirely without
escape from the werwolf.</p>

<p>There within her the name had lain and waited
and watched until now it arose again to provide
her with a way of escape.</p>

<p>Wenk’s last words had brought it forth from
the subconscious recesses once more. The Countess
had received it as a direct weapon against the
secret power of this man who had so long taken
forcible possession of her will and her entire
person. She suddenly came to herself, and all
that was frozen within her melted. The gloom and
darkness in which she lay bound grew lighter,
and it was day within.</p>

<p>Then, too, she regained all the proud youthful
force of her disposition. She fell into a God-given
fury, and her muscles were endowed with
unconquerable strength and vigour. Her hands
and her heart were like iron, and she seized the
first weapon to hand, the heavy screw-wrench,
striking the murderer from behind, and dealing
a terrific blow upon his skull.</p>

<p>Mabuse, judged and condemned, lost his balance,
and fell over Wenk into the depths below, which
instantly swallowed him up.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Wenk reached a thwart with his legs, raised
himself up at lightning speed, the knots at his
breast breaking of themselves. He fell into the
car. The aeroplane was already swaying in space,
but Wenk seized the throttle and righted it. It
flew on, and after he had found his whereabouts
he shut off the engines and allowed it to descend
to earth and glide along the shore.</p>

<p> He landed on the sand-dunes of the East Frisian
coast. He helped the Countess out of the machine.
She was pale, but fully conscious. She fell down
before him, pressing her hands to her face.</p>

<p>He raised her, saying, “We have saved each
other’s lives. Let us keep silent, and strive to
forget. We part here!”</p>

<p>But the Countess answered, “No. I have
nothing to conceal and nothing to forget. The
blood that I have shed was entirely evil. I have
saved him from himself and mankind from him.
Who can bear witness against me?”</p>

<p>Wenk looked at her, dumb with astonishment,
but slowly he understood. Then he was seized
with awe. He wanted to say, “How proud,
how courageous she is!” but his heart glowed
within him. He spread out his arms in a gesture
of self-abandonment and appeal. Life, his regained
youth and vigour, came over him like a flood, and
at the same moment the love which had been
shaken by so many vicissitudes, but had never yet
found its fulfilment, regained its sway over him.</p>

<p>Then they ascended the dunes together, to seek
the nearest village and return to daily life.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
